STUDms INTHE NATURAL PHILOSOPHY OF
sm KENELMbIGBY
PART II.DIGBY AND ALCHEMY
By BETTYJo DOBBs*
SIRKenelm Digby(I603-I66s)-virtuoso,"compleat Gendeman", alchemist,
.student of life processes, and mechanical phllosopher-:-lSa figurewho in his
own person demonstrates a great many of the currents at work in the pre-
Newtonian period of natural science. Grounded in Aristotleand also in the
Paracelsian principles of sympathetic medicine, Digby all his life accepted
as true certain tenets of these older sciences. Yet he also sought mechanical
explanations for his received facts and, furthermore, he attempted to utilize
empirical criteria in his natural philosophical work and writings.l
Digby'sefforts met with mingled acclain1 and disparagement even in
the seventeenth century and his work was soon superseded and forgotten.
His attitudes and ideas are significant, however, in illuminating the complex
currents and crosscurrents in the development of seventeenth-century natural
philosophy. This is particulary true in the field of alchemy-chemistry, with
which the second and third parts of these Digby "Studies" will be concerned.2
Digby did not make a largecontribution to positivechemical knowledge.
Nevertheless his profound empiricism acted upon the study of alchemy in
such a way that that branch of the occult became in hishands much lessesoteric
and much more a part of rational natural philosophy.
Interestin alchemy was largein the seventeenth century and Digby came
into contact with a number of men who held beliefSsimilar to his regarding
transmutation. With them he shared his secrets and in turn collected theirs.
Such a cooperative intellectual endeavour presupposes communication.
Whereas the language of the older alchemy had been made deliberately vague,
in the hands of Digby and some of hiscontemporaries it became clearer and
rnore rational and was made to describe precise chemical events. Thus during
Digby'slifetime and for approximately half a century after hisdeath, alchemy
was enabled to provide a broad paradigm for chemical research, a paradigm
which ~as a fruitful alternative to iatrochemistry at a time when chemistry
was stillfar from being a unified and independent field.
* 306 Spruce Street,Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514, U.S.A.
I Betty Jo Dobbs, "Studies in the Natural Philosophy of SirKenelm Digby.Part I", Ambix,
18, 1-25, 1971. Hereinafter referred to as Dobbs, "Digby. Part I."
2 The seriesof Digby "Studies" by the present writer was originally projected in three parts,
with Digby'sbiological work comprising the third. The alchemical material having proved to be
too extensive for inclusion in a single article, however, the serieshas been expanded and the bio-
logical study postponed to a subsequent fourth part.
AMBIX Vol. XX Part 3 November 1973

144 BETI"Y JO DOBBS
The advent of mechanical philosophies in the seventeenth century is
usually supposed to have sounded the death knell of alchemy. Following
Metzger's pioneer work in the area,3 that thesishas been rather generally
accepted. Yet a number of the giants of mechanical philosophy-notably
Boyle, Newton, and Boerhaave-never completely disavowed the possibility
of transmutation. Rather, each of these men seems to have held to some sort
of general alchemical theory which he translated into mechanical terms.4
Rather than the prevailing tendency toward mechanism, it issuggested
here that it was the accumulation of negative evidence which finally caused
a significant decline in the popularity of the concept of transmutability and
that the process of the rejection of the claims of the old alchemists took place
in two stages.
The firstof these was what may be called the clarification and chemi-
calization of alchemical thought and practice. This step served to provide a
body of literaturewhich offered examples of transmutations in rational ter-
minology, examples which were in fact presented operationally. The second
stage,which continued into the eighteenth century, occurred when such opera-
tions came to oe attempted again and new generations of experimentalists
found the earlierreports of transmutations to be inaccurate.
Digby entered into the process of rejection at the firststage.He was as
thoroughly convinced of the "fact" of metallic transmutation as of the general
correctness of Aristotleand of the possibilityof sympathetic medical treatments;
but in -hiswork he rationalized the language of alchemy and simplified the
processes.Hisown favourite recipe was fully operational; for the most part those
he collected from others were also. Many of them may even be translated into
twentieth-century terminology and in Part IIIof these Digby "Studies" some
3 Helene Metzger, Lesdoctrineschimiques en Francedu dibut du XVIIe alafin du XVIIIesiecle,Paris,
1923, esp. 229-77 and 421-68.
4 Itisbeyond the scope of the present article to consider the alchemical ideas of Boyle, Newton,
and Boerhaave. The interested reader may find some of the following references useful, however.
On Boyle, two older articles are stillimportant: (I)Louis Trenchard More, "Boyle as Alchemist",
Journal of the His/or]of Ideas,2, 61-76, 1941; (2) AaronJ. Ihde, "Alchemy in Reverse: Robert Boyle
on the Degradation of Gold", Chymia g, 47-57 1964.Some of Newton's ideas on transmutation have
been approached by studies on the change from Hypothesis IIIof the firstedition of the Principia to
Rule IIIof the second and subsequent editions: (I)Alexandre Koyre, "Newton's 'Regulae Philoso-
phandi''', in Newtonian Studies, Cambrid~e, Mass., 1965.,26I-7~.ij2)J..~cGuire, "Transmuta-
tion and Immutability: Newton's Doctrine of PhysicalQualities",Ambix,14,69-g5,1967 ;J.E.
McGuire, "The Origin of Newton's Doctrine of Essential Qualities", Centaurus, 12, 233-60,I9btl.
Boerhaave presented the principles of alchemy in systematic form in his chemical lectures. See
Herman Boerhaave, A New Method of Chemistry, trans. by P. Shaw and E. Chambers, London, 1727,
99-104.

THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHY OF SIRKENELM DIGBY
representative ones from hisbook Secrets5will be so presented with theirseven.
teenth- and twentieth-century descriptions in.parallel.
The present article will concentrate on presenting the historical context
of Digby'salchemical studies, utilizingas Ill:uchas possible relevant infor-
mation about his known alchemical associates.The format will be largely
chronological and it is hoped that t1)isapproach will demonstrate Digby's
own development and also something of the changes taking place in alchemy
during his lifetime.
DIGBY'S ALCHEMICAL ACTIVITIESAND AsSOCIATES
SirKenelm Digby was in many respects a late product of Renaissance
Hermeticism,6 which had in England been grafted onto the native alchemical
tradition of men like Roger Bacon, Thomas Norton, and SirGeorge Ripley.
Renaissance Hermeticism had come to England during the Elizabethan
peri~d with John Dee7 and the Northumberland Circle.8 The person who
was laterto be Digby'stutorat Oxford, one Thomas Allen, was fully within
that Hermetic movement, sharing with the others interestsin astrology, al-
chemy, and Cabalism, as well as mathematics, history, astronomy, and phil-
osophy.9 Allen had "succeeded", as Fuller put it, "to the skilland scandal of
Frier Bacon", 10 and had in hisrooms at Gloucester Hall "a greatmany math-
ematicall instruments and gl~sses".llInto those.rooms in 1618 catp.ethe young
Kenelm Digby. Itwas the beginning of a warm relationship which lasted
until Allen's death. Allen called Digby "the Mirandula of his age" after the
greatPico12 and left him hisburning glassand a quantity of extremely valuable
5 SirKenelm Digby, A Choice Collectionof Rare Secrets and Experiments in Philosophy.AsAlso Rare
and unheard-of Medicines, Menstruums, and Alkahest1; with the True Secret of Volatilizing the fixt Salt of
Tartar. CollectedAnd Experimented bythe Honourable and truryLearned Sir Kenelm Digby,Kt. Chancellour
to Her Majesry the Queen-Mother. Hitherto kept Secret since his Decease,but now Publishedfor the good and
benefitof the Publick;,By GeorgeHartman~ London: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by William
Cooper, at the Pelican in LittleBritain; and HenryFaithorne and John Kersey,at the Rose in St. Paul's
Church-yard, 1682. Hereinafter referred to as Digby, Secrets.Additional details on the publication
of thisposthumous work of Digby'.:iwill also appear in Part IIIof these "Studies".
6 On Renaissance Hermeticism, see Frances A. Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition,
Chicago, London, and Toronto, 196.4.Hereinafter referred to as Yates, Bruno.
7 Charlotte Fell Smith)John Dee (1527-1608) London, 1909,hereinafter referred to as Smith,
Dee;Frances A. Yates, Theatre of the World, Chicago, 1969, I-4I.
8 Robert Hugh Kargon, Atomism in Englandfrom Hariot to Newton, Oxford, 1966, 5-17.
9 Mark H. Curtis, Oxfordand Cambridge in Transition, 1528-1642. An Essay on Changing Relations
betweenthe English Universities and English Society;,Oxford, 1965, 236.
10 Thomas Fuller, The History of the Worthies of England: Endeavoured byThomas Fuller,D.D.First
printed in 1662, A New Edition, 2 vols., London, 181 I, 11,310.
11 John Aubrey, "Brief LivesH• Chieflyof Contemporaries;,set down byJohn Aubrey,betweenthe Years
1669 fit1696, ed. by Andrew Clark, 2 vols., Oxford, 1898, I,27. Hereinafter referred to as Aubrey,
Lives.
12 Ibid.,I,22.,.

