THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND 
JOURNAL OF SURGERY 
Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transniissior1 by post as a perlodlcal 
~ 
__ ~_____~ 
~~ 
~~ 
- ~______ ~ ~ -- __~ 
No. 1. 
~ - ~ 
VOL. IX. JULY, 1939. 
~~~ ~. - .~ 
~~ ___ 
~~ 
-~ 
SIR KENELM DIGBY AND HIS “CHOICE RECEIPTS”. 
BY K. F. RUSSELL, 
Melbourne. 
IK these enlighteiied (lays of modeim surgery it is interesting to turn hack 
to the period in which the piaactice of surgery was still in its infancy. 
Althoiigh much is to be learned from periisal of the orthodox books on surgeiy, 
in this sketch we will peer into a quite unoi-thodox portion of its history. 
Throughout the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centiiries j t was 
the practice for many families to keep manuscript books in which were 
written recipes for cures and panaceas for all the ills of man. These recipes 
were gleaned from many sources and were handed down from generation 
to generation as homely remedies. 
Many of these manuscript books are still in existence, but not a few were 
printed in book form for the greater benefit of the piihlic. Such a book 
appeared in 1668, the author being Sir Kenelm Digby and the title: “Choice 
and Experimented Receipts in Physick and Chirurgei-y, as also Cordial and 
Distilled Waters aiid Spirits, Perfumes, and other Curiosities.” This, the i’aw 
first English edition, was “Translatetl oiit of several Langiiages by G.H.” 
(Oeoyge Hartman). 
The authoy, whose portrait fi*oni the book forms the illustration to this 
sketch, had a somewhat tiirbiilent career. Born in 1603, he was the soil of 
Sir Everarcl Digby. His father had the bad judgement to rise in arms on 
the occasion of the gunpowder plot, for which regrettable lack of taste he lost 
his head at the hands of the piihlic executioner on January 27, 1606. 
The young Kenelm was educated at Oxfo~d, and in 1621 he went to 
France and the Continent to improve his knowledge. On his return from 
his travels Charles I knighted him and appointed him a commissioner for the 
Xavy. In 1628 he fought against the Venetians at the head of his own 
squadron of ships. 
Returning to England in 1638, he espoused the came of the King, for 
which he was promptly impiaisoned by Parliament. His release having beeii 
effected by the French Queen Mother, he retired in some disorder to France, 
where he was welcomed at the Court and made Chancellor to the Qiieen 
4 THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND JOURNAL OF SIJKGEKT. 

Mother. Banished upon pain of death from England by I’arliament, lie 
retuimed to London during tlie rule of Cromwell, whose intimate friend he was. 
After the Restoration lie was appointed one of the Council of the newly 
formed Royal Society, w1iic.h post he fillet1 until his tleatli in 1665. 
A11vn-y~ interested in scientific pursuits, he wrote ;L large niiniber of 
books, amongst which are : “A Conference about a (’hoice of Religion”, 16% ; 
‘‘A Treatise 011 the Nature of Eodies”, 1644; “A Discourse on Vegetation”, 
1661 ; “Observations on the Keligio Xetliei by Sir Thomas U~owiie” ; “On 
the Cure of Wounds by the Power of Sympathy”, 166s. 
His “Choice Receipts” makes deliglitful reading, even if it reflects 
adversely on the ciwlulity of his fellow men. JIilliy of tlie recipes are 
compouiitletl of iiauseous c20iistitueiits, but when one remembers that 
powdered vipers, human skull bone aiid animal exciaeta were present in the 
official pliarniacopin, these recipes are not so fantastic. as they iiow appear. 
The following have been chosen from the book for their surgical reference, 
niicl it would be interesting to study the reactions of modelm patients if 
they were confronted with prescriptions similar to any of the following. The 
spelling and pliraseology have been left as they appcar in the book. 
For the King’s-Evil. 
A most contumacious foul inveterate King’s-evil (several times touched by the 
King, and wrought upon by the best chyrurgeons and given over as desperate) was 
perfectly cured thus: 
Take Garden-snails that have white or gray houses upon them, and beat them 
in a Mortar with a little Parsly into consistence of a Plaister, and so apply it to the 
sore or sores, and change it for a fresh every twenty four hours. This is also good to 
take away the raging pain of the Gowt. 
A certain Remedy for the Retention of Urine. 
Make a strong decoction of Horse-radish Roots in white wine, put to it a little Hares 
Wool dryed in powder. Drink of this Decoction morning and night. You will see the 
effects of it speedily. 
An experimented Remedy for the Stone. 
A certain Person at Rome was sick of a great stone in his bladder, who after inany 
Remedies (taken in vain) was resolved to be cut; having agreed with the Operator, 
this following Remedy was proposed to him by a Priest who had made trial upon 
himself and many others. 
Take a good quantity of Millepedes, wash them with white wine, then put them 
into a glased Pot; Lute and close it well, and set it in an oven to dry the Millepedes: 
Then reduce them to fine Powder; then put to this Powder as much White Wine as it 
will drink up; then put it in the oven again as before. Then take this powder, and 
mix it with strawberrie-water, and a scruple of Oyl of Vitriol, and dry once more in 
the oven; then keep it in a Glass close stopped. Of this powder the patient took 
four scruples and half ail ounce of Aquavitae mixt with some fit Broath in the morning 
fasting; the effect of it was thus: The patient found himself in great pain and was 
much tormented, for the space of two hours; And after five hours passed he made a little 
urine, but very thick. The second day having taken this Medicine again, his urine was 
much thicker than the first. And on 
the ninth day the Patient was perfectly cured from his stone. 
It is thus: 
The third day he avoided a great deal of sand. 
Another approved Remedy for the stone and Gravel, and for Strangury of Urine. 
Take the fat of a Buck Rabbit, melt it, and Anoint the Back and Reins with it. 
This will open the passage of Urine wonderfully. A child was cured with this; so that 
in twenty four hours it made four Pots full of Urine. 
