Sir Kenelm Digby (1603–1665): diplomat, entrepreneur, privateer,
duellist, scientist and philosopher ans_5708 911..914
Sam A. Mellick
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
Key words
education, surgical.
Correspondence
Sam A. Mellick, Honorary Professor, University of
Queensland, 34 Towers Street, Brisbane, Qld 4007,
Australia. Email: mellick@optusnet.com.au
S. A. Mellick CBE, FRACS.
Accepted for publication 5 January 2011.
doi: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.2011.05708.x
Abstract
Kenelm Digby was a man with widely differing interests. He studied at Oxford but left
without a degree. At the age of 20, he was involved in a dramatic street brawl in
Madrid; the following year saw him as a successful privateer in the Mediterranean and
adjacent Atlantic waters, and he was then appointed a naval administrator with lucra-
tive trade monopolies. He practised medicine without formal qualiﬁcations and gained
notoriety by promoting the use of ‘sympathetic’ powder for healing wounds.
Befriended by King James I and his son who succeeded him, he became chancellor to
Queen Henrietta and was knighted by King James I on 21 October 1623 and appointed
to the Privy Council. At one time, he even spent a brief time in prison, but he later
became a founding member of the Royal Society and published two major philosophi-
cal treatises as well as a popular cookbook. He designed and manufactured wine
bottles with tapered necks for simpler pouring and square sides for easy stacking. He
dabbled in mathematics and corresponded with Fermat of ‘Last Theorem’ fame. In
1641, he challenged a French nobleman who publicly cast a slur on the British King
to a ‘digladiation’ (a sword duel) and quickly dispatched him. He was a friend and
admirer of Sir Thomas Browne whose ‘Religio Medici’ he helped to publish. The
Cowlishaw Library holds a 1659 5th edition copy of this remarkable book, with
Digby’s name on the spine. Truly, Digby must qualify as a Renaissance man.
Introduction
Sir Kenelm Digby is not so widely known as Sir Thomas Browne is,
the highly regarded 17th century English physician, a man whose
opinion was frequently sought by colleagues, a devoted Christian,
widely acclaimed for his published work ‘Religio Medici’ which is
still in print after 350 years. But it was Digby who assisted Browne
to have the deﬁnitive copy of his book published in 1642 in London.
A 1659 copy of this book resides in the Cowlishaw Library of the
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons and it includes ‘Observa-
tions’ by Digby in language typical during that time (Fig. 1).
Kenelm Digby was certainly remarkable – he possessed a variety
of talents which he used in an astonishing number of diverse activi-
ties packed into his 62 years. His interests were so varied and
successful that he might well be compared favourably to earlier
Renaissance greats.
Background
Kenelm was born in England on 11 January 1603, 3 months after the
death of Queen Elizabeth I, at Gayhurst in Buckinghamshire to Sir
Everard Digby and his wife Mary. In 1605, Sir Everard, a staunch
Catholic convert, was one of a group of conspirators led by Robert
Gatesby who planned to blow up the English Houses of Parliament.
Guy Fawkes, whose name came to identify the plot, actually planted
the explosives, but he was arrested on 5 November and the plot
failed. Gatesby was shot while resisting arrest and the other con-
spirators were executed, including Sir Everard, who was beheaded in
St Paul’s Churchyard on 31 January 1606.
For his own safety, the young Kenelm, then aged 3, was separated
from his Catholic mother, and, for a time, became the ward of
William Laud, who himself had a remarkable career, becoming
Privy Councillor in 1626, Bishop of London in 1628 and Archbishop
of Canterbury in 1633. Laud was friendly with both James I and
Charles I, and under the patronage of the latter, he endeavoured to
restore the tall wooden spire which had caught ﬁre and toppled from
the tower of the massive mediaeval St Paul’s Cathedral in 1561.
Laud never completed this work, and because of his extensive
involvement in Church politics, he was impeached by the Long
Parliament in 1640 and summarily executed.
After Laud’s guardianship, Digby became the ward of his uncle,
Sir John Digby, who was appointed Ambassador in Madrid and later
THE COWLISHAW SYMPOSIUM 2010
ANZJSurg.com
© 2011 The Author
ANZ Journal of Surgery © 2011 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons ANZ J Surg 81 (2011) 911–914
became Earl of Bristol. His father’s execution and the automatic
forfeiture of his estate was followed by a litigation on behalf of the
young son which resulted in some of the unconﬁscated property
being remitted to the lad, and this earned him 15 000 pounds per
year. He stayed with his uncle in Spain for 6 months until April 1618
and quickly developed a familiarity with court and diplomatic
affairs, and at the age of 15, he entered Oxford’s Gloucester Hall
(later Worcester College). He remained there until 1620 and studied
Physical Science and Mathematics under Thomas Allen who was so
impressed by his pupil’s brilliance that he bequeathed many of his
valuable books and manuscripts to him, and Digby later presented
them to the Bodleian Library.
For the next 3 years, Digby travelled widely throughout Europe, a
popular custom for young gentlemen at that time, and he returned to
England in September 1623 where he was befriended by Prince
Charles, and surprisingly, for one so young, he was knighted by King
James I on 23 October of that year. In 1625, he secretly married Sir
Edward Stanley’s beautiful daughter V enetia whose antenuptial
reputation has been described as ‘not spotless’, but their marriage
was a happy one, and their union produced four sons and a daughter.
Sadly, V enetia died suddenly in 1633, possibly from tuberculosis.
Digby’s medical activities
Back in London in 1623, after his European sojourn, Digby prac-
tised as a ‘quack’. Conventional physicians of the time regarded him
as a non-qualiﬁed practitioner, but he enjoyed a successful following
in England. When he was a courtier in Spain, he studied the lip
reading technique of a Catholic padre who found a way to teach deaf
mutes to speak. But he gained widespread recognition on the conti-
nent as well as at home by his promotion of the ‘powder of sympa-
thy’ in wound management, after he presented an account of its use
and a suggested mode of its action to the Academy of Sciences at the
University of Montpellier in France in 1657 (Fig. 2). Digby was
there for treatment of his bladder stone, and his ‘discourse’ on the
subject was published in Paris and in London in 1658 and was
reprinted more than 20 times. The technique was to mix a salve of
ferrous sulphate with discharge from a wound, and then the salve
was applied to the causative agent, sword or gun, and the wound
itself was simply cleaned without the usual application of caustics or
cautery or other irritants, the same gentle form of wound treatment
promoted by Ambrose Paré over 100 years before. Digby considered
that the ‘powder’ worked by the transfer of ‘blood atoms’ from the
wound coming into contact with ‘curative atoms’ in the salve and
these were then attracted back to the wound where they effected the
cure, whereas in reality, the unhindered ‘vis medicatrix naturae’ of
the blandly treated wound was allowed to operate successfully.
Fig. 1. Religio Medici – 1659 (Cowl-
ishaw Library, RACS, Melbourne).
Fig. 2. Anatomy Theatre Montpellier University (photograph by the
author).
912 Mellick
© 2011 The Author
ANZ Journal of Surgery © 2011 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
Digby – Master of digladiation
Duelling with swords has a long history, but it was not until 1656 that
Digby’s contemporary and noted logophile Sir Thomas Browne
coined the descriptive term ‘digladiation’ for such encounters. In rare
use today, like duelling itself, the word is attractive and rolls smoothly
over the tongue and its disappearance would be regrettable.
During his time in Europe from 1620, Digby ﬁrst spent a short
time in France; then he moved to Italy where he quickly learned the
language and became an expert fencer. His skill in this activity must
have been highly regarded, for a 1621 Italian publication on fencing,
‘Oplomachia’, was dedicated to him. This particular expertise stood
him in good stead on at least two occasions.
In the summer of 1623, he visited his uncle, by then Earl of
Bristol, in Madrid. After dinner with him one night, Digby set off to
walk back to his lodgings accompanied by his cousin and a friend.
On the way, the three men were attacked without warning by a group
of 15 ‘armed’ men and a ﬁerce sword ﬁght followed. Digby relates
in his ‘Memoirs’ how the attackers were overcome, with several of
them wounded, and their leader slain by himself; after which
success, he was acclaimed a hero by the local population.
In 1641, Digby was present at a banquet in Paris where he felt that
a French nobleman, Mont le Ros, spoke disparagingly about King
Charles I. Like Nelson 150 years later, Digby must have felt the need
‘ ...t o consider every man your enemy who speaks ill of your King’,
for he promptly challenged the man to a duel, and in the ensuing
encounter, he killed his opponent with a thrust through the heart.
However, the offence was pardoned by the French King on the
grounds that Digby was defending the fair name of his King and
Digby was given safe conduct out of France.
On his return to England and despite his popularity and hero
status, he soon found himself in prison presumably because of his
well-known and active opposition to the spread of Puritanism.
Digby’s sea adventures
By the year 1627, much of England’s maritime ﬂeet was at the
mercy of pirates, principally armed merchant vessels ﬂying French,
Dutch, Flemish or Spanish ﬂags. Digby apparently decided that
retaliation was called for; he equipped two ships with a full comple-
ment of sailors and, with King Charles’ knowledge, set sail from
Deal in December of that year. Within a month, he had captured
several Flemish and Dutch vessels near Gibraltar. Because of sick-
ness in his crew, possibly scurvy, he then anchored near Majorca
until the men had recovered, and then promptly captured another
well-laden Dutch vessel.
There were by now more frequent attacks on English ships in the
Eastern Mediterranean near the Turkish coast. This prompted Digby
to move to those waters and on 11 June 1628, he unleashed a ﬁerce
attack on unsuspecting French and V enetian vessels anchored in the
Turkish harbour of Scanderoon (now Alexandretta) (Fig. 3). After
overcoming ﬁerce resistance, he claimed considerable booty and
returned to England in February 1629 to a warm welcome from the
court as well as the general public. He was appointed a naval admin-
istrator, then Governor of Trinity House, the Lighthouse Authority
for England and Wales, the Channel Islands and Gibraltar; and
additionally, he received the Patents of a Monopoly of Trade for
Sealing Wax in Wales and the adjacent border counties; and these
positions produced a signiﬁcant additional income.
For the next few years, he spent time with his family and pursued
many activities at home, but he was greatly saddened by the sudden
death of his beloved wife V enetia on May 1633, possibly from
tuberculosis; and he promptly arranged for van Dyck to paint her
shortly after her death, exactly as she was found. Along with praise
from other notables, Ben Jonson wrote a poem in her honour.
Digby’s versatility
Mathematics
Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665), a contemporary of Digby, qualiﬁed
as a lawyer in Paris but soon became interested in Mathematics,
Numbers Theory and Geometry as a hobby; he devised a great
number of theorems and also developed a form of Calculus a few
years before Newton. Around 1637, he wrote in the margin of his
copy of the ‘Arithmetica’ written by the great mathematician,
Bioplantus in Alexandria in the 3rd century. ‘ ...I ti si m possible to
separate a cube into two cubes or a biquadrate into two biquadrates
or generally any power except a square into 2 powers with the same
exponent. I have discovered a truly marvellous proof of this which
however, the margin is not large enough to contain’. This theorem
can be expressed algebraically as
xyznnn+=
where n can never be greater than 2. Many of Fermat’s propositions
were either proved or disproved over the next 200 years, but despite
many attempts, this particular theorem remained unsolved and it
became known as ‘Fermat’s Last Theorem’. It was in fact only
solved by the English mathematician, Andrew Wiles in 1994. Digby
apparently corresponded with Fermat, in particular about Numbers
Theory and Pythagorean Triangles; and in 1655, the Englishman
John Wallis (1616–1703) published his ‘Arithmetica Inﬁnitorum’ in
which he, too, anticipated calculus, and he fulsomely dedicated the
work to Digby, who obviously had impressed a talented French and
an English mathematician.
Fig. 3. Arrow showing Gulf at Scanderoon from 1845 (map in possession
of the author).
Sir Kenelm Digby (1603–1665) 913
© 2011 The Author
ANZ Journal of Surgery © 2011 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
