SIR KENELM DIGBY ON ‘FOLIE A DEUX’. 
AN HISTORICAL NOTE 
BY H. PHILLIP GREENBERG,* RICHARD A. HUNTER? 
AND IDA MACALPINES 
I. . . pray you to remember, that when two Lutes, 
or two Harps, near one another, both set to the 
same tune, if you touch the strings of the one, the 
other consonant harp will sound at the same time, 
though no body touch it. . . . 
SIR KENELM DIGBY, 1658 
The interesting phenomenon of one person 
inducing mental illness in another is not 
uncommon, but little understood, and still 
presents a challenge to all theories of mental 
illness (Greenberg, 1954). 
Recognition of induced psychosis or folie 2 
deux as a psychiatric picture is generally 
credited to the nineteenth-century French and 
German schools of descriptive psychiatry. 
Mass or epidemic psychoses had been studied 
historically (Hecker, 1844; Calmeil, 1845), and 
at first hand (Constans, 1863), but these 
observations did not further the delineation 
or understanding of clinical cases of induced 
psychosis. 
Claims for priority 
RCgis (1 880), describing folie simultane‘e, 
gave priority to Laskgue & Falret who coined 
the name folie 6 deux in a paper read to the 
SociCtC MCdico-Psychologique in 1873, pub- 
lished in 1877. Lastgue & Falret (1877) in turn 
referred only to one earlier clinical report by 
Dagron (1861). In a later ‘rectifying note’, 
RCgis (1 885) transferred priority to Baillarger 
(1860) who had reported ‘Some examples of 
folie communique‘e’, and this has since been 
accepted in French psychiatric literature as the 
* Senior Registrar, Department of Psychologi- 
cal Medicine, Guy’s Hospital. 
t In receipt of a grant from the Wellcome 
Trustees. 
$ Dermatological Department, St Bartholo- 
first clinical description. The publications of a 
number of other French authors, including 
Esquirol(l81 l), were ignored. 
In Germany, Jorger (1888), while acknow- 
ledging the French contributions, claimed 
priority for his countryman Berlyn (1819) who 
had described mother and son sharing identical 
hypochondriacal delusions ‘quickly healed by 
psychic means’. Jorger also drew attention to 
Hofbauer’s (1846) paper on Znfectio psychica, 
but neglected Ideler’s (1838) discussion and 
case histories entitled ‘ Madness through the 
imitative instinct’. Feuchtersleben (1 845) had 
also discussed the contagion of delusional 
ideas through ‘pathological sympathy’, and 
Finkelnburg (1 861) described twelve cases in 
his major contribution ‘The influence of the 
imitative instinct on the spread of sporadic 
insanity’. 
The first American authors (Seguin, 1879; 
Kiernan, 1880; Spitzka, 1883) to describe such 
cases adopted the conclusions of the French. 
The Italians, judging from Seppilli’s (1890) 
review, derived their views essentially from 
French and German writers, as did Tuke 
(1887, 1888) in England in his papers on 
‘Communicated insanity’. 
Earlier English literature 
All authors seem to have overlooked a great 
deal of relevant earlier English literature. 
Whytt (1764) wrote that ‘there is a still more 
wonderful sympathy between the nervous 
systems of different persons, whence various 
motions and morbid symptoms are often trans- 
ferred from one to another, without any cor- 
poreal contact or infection’, which Primrose 
(1638) had ascribed to ‘simpathy, antipathy, 
contapion. fascination and other such trifles’. mew’s Hospital. “2 
SIR KENELM DIGBY 
Haygarth (1800) noted that ‘nervous disorders 
are very liable to be communicated’; Prichard 
(1822) spoke of the multiplication ‘by the 
influence of sympathy’ of severe mental dis- 
turbances, and Millingen (1837) suggested that 
‘transmission of mental disease may be attri- 
buted to morbid moral and physical sym- 
pathies, which might be avoided by withdraw- 
ing the persons exposed to it from the sphere of 
their action’. 
We will not further digress into the history of 
this subject here; it is our purpose to draw 
attention to a hitherto unnoticed account by 
Sir Kenelm Digby of the induction of insanity; 
he anticipated, indeed almost paraphrased, 
Laskgue & Falret’s observations by more than 
200 years. Digby (1603-65), writer, naval 
commander, diplomatist, philosopher, ama- 
teur scientist, was a member of the first Council 
of the Royal Society and friend of the eminent 
scientists and philosophers of his time. 
In 1658 there appeared ‘A Late Discourse 
made in a Solemne Assembly of Nobles and 
Learned Men at Montpellier in France; by Sr. 
Kenelme Digby, Knight, &c. Touching the 
Cure of Wounds by the Powder of Sympathy 
. . . Rendred faithfully out of French into 
English by R. White. Gent.’ The ‘Powder of 
Sympathy, doth naturally, and without any 
Magick, cure wounds without touching them.’ 
It was only necessary to soak bandages from 
the wound in a solution of the powder. Mean- 
time ‘I advise you to cast away all your play- 
sters, onely keep the wound clean, and in a 
moderate temper, twixt heat and cold’-to an 
aseptic age sufficient explanation of its efficacy. 
Digby, however, was at pains to explain its 
action by an exposition of the nature of 
‘ sympathy’ in its physical and psychological 
connotations, and here the relevant passage 
occurs. 
Lasbgue & Falret concluded that: the 
‘active’ partner being more intelligent or in a 
position of authority, creates the delusions 
and imposes them on the ‘passive’ subject or 
subjects ; an isolated and prolonged intimacy 
seems necessary. Heredity does not supply an 
overall exdanation. Delusions are more likelv 
ON ‘FOLIE A DEUX’ 295 
to be accepted in so far as they are plausible and 
play on the hopes and fears of the passive sub- 
ject; often they are accepted only after a fruit- 
less and exhausting struggle to restore the 
sanity of the person primarily ill: ‘the indif- 
ferent escape both this useless travail and its 
consequences ’. The prognosis for secondarily 
affected individuals is invariably good. 
Sir Kenelm Digby’s account 
All these observations are contained in 
Digby’s account: 
Now lets consider how the strong imagination of 
one man doth marvailously act upon another man, 
who hath it more feeble and passive. We see dayly, 
that ifa person gape, those who see him gaping, are 
excited to do the same. If one come perchance to 
converse with persons that are subject to excesseof 
laughter, one can hardly forbear laughing, al- 
though one doth not know the cause why they 
laugh. * If one should enter into a house, where all 
the World is sad, he becomes melancholy.. . . 
Women and Children being very moist and passive, 
are most susceptible of this unpleasing contagion 
of the imagination. I have known a very melan- 
choly woman, which was subject to the disease call- 
ed the Mother,? and while she continued in that 
mood, she thought her self possessed, and did 
strange things, which among those that knew not 
the cause, passed for supernatural effects, and of 
one possessed by the ill spirit: she was a person of 
quality, and all this happened, because of the deep 
resentment she had for the death of her Husband: 
She had attending her four or five young Gentle- 
* Cf. Bacon (1627): ‘Motions passe from one 
Man to another, not so much by Exciting Imagi- 
nation; as by Imitation; Especially if there be an 
Aptness or Inclination before. Therefore Gaping, 
or Yawning, and Stretching, doe passe from Man to 
Man.. . .So that if another be apt and prepared to 
doe the like, he followeth by the Sight of another. 
So the Laughing of another maketh to Laugh.’ 
t ‘The disease called the Mother’ was thought 
to be caused by noxious vapours arising from the 
matrix or uterus, sometimes even by that organ 
straying from its appointed place as into the throat 
in ‘Suffocation of the mother’. The concept is still 
current in psychiatric terminology under its Greek 
, name hysteria. 
296 H. PHILLIP GREENBERG AND OTHERS 
women, whereof some were her Kinswomen, and 
others served her as Chambermaids. All these 
came to be possessed as she was, and did prodigious 
actions. These young Maids were separated from 
her sight, and communication, and as they had not 
yet contracted such profound roots of the evil, they 
came to be all cured by their absence; and this 
Lady was also cured afterwards by a Physitian, 
which purged the atrabilious humours, and re- 
stored her matrix to its former estate, there was 
neither imposture, or dissimulation in this. 
I could make a notable recital of such passions 
that happened to the Nunnes at Ludun; but. . . I will 
forbear speaking thereof at this time, otherwise 
then to pray you to remember, that when two Lutes, 
or two Harps, near one another, both set to the 
same tune, if you touch the strings of the one, the 
other consonant harp will sound at the same time, 
though no body touch it, whereof Galileo hath 
ingeniously rendred the reason. 
Further 
all the effects of a strong and vehement imagination 
working upon another more feeble, passive, and 
tender, ought to be more efficacious in the Mother 
acting upon her son, then when the imaginations of 
other persons act upon them who are nothing to 
them. 
Some contemporary observations 
Among Digby’s learned contemporaries, the 
immortal Harvey (165 1) had noted in passing 
the sharing of delusions: ‘a noble lady who 
had borne more than ten children. . .being 
married to a second husband, she considered 
herself pregnant, forming her judgement not 
only from the symptoms on which she usually 
relied, but also from themovementsofthechild, 
which were frequently felt both by herself and 
her sister, who occupied the same bed with her. 
No arguments of mine could divest her of this 
belief. The symptoms depended on flatulence 
and fat’. The prolific Robert Boyle (1663) 
wrote ‘it often enough happens, that when a 
Woman is in a Fit of the Mother, another 
Hysterical person standing by, is by reason of a 
peculiar Disposition of her Body, soon infected 
with the like strange discomposure’. The theo- 
logian and classical scholar Casaubon (1655) 
had suggested ‘that learned Naturalists and 
Physicians may.. .consider.. .Whether it be 
probable or possible, that natural1 Ecstasies 
and Enthusiasmes, such as proceed from natur- 
all causes merely, should be contagious: 
though not contagious in the same manner as 
the Plague, or the Pox is; yet contagious in their 
kind’; at the same time he firmly upheld the 
reality of demoniacal possession. The more 
enlightened and observant Digby denied the 
influence of ‘supernatural effects’ and posses- 
sion ‘ by the ill spirit’, and substituted a psycho- 
pathology. How advanced his views were can 
be seen from the fact that six years after his lec- 
ture the expert medical evidence of Sir Thomas 
Browne sent two women to the gallows for 
witchcraft. Even the great Willis (1667) writing 
on ‘The Pathology of the Brain and Nervous 
Stock’ stressed ‘that very oftentimes most 
admirable passions are produced in the 
humane body, by the delusions of the Devil1 . . . 
by some means he enters himself into the 
humane body’, though he is not ‘presently or 
allways to be brought upon the stage’. 
Summary 
Attention is drawn to Sir Kenelm Digby’s 
description of the condition now known as 
induced psychosis or folie 6 deux more than 
200 years before Baillarger, and Lastgue and 
Falret, to whom priority is generally ascribed. 
REFERENCES 
BACON, F. (1627). Sylva Sylvarum: or a Naturall 
BAILLARGER, J. G. F. (1860). Gaz. hiip., Paris, 
BERLYN, C. (1 8 19). Z. psychische Aerzte, Leipzig, CASAUBON, M. (1655). A Treatise concerning 
BOYLE, THE HON. ROBERT (1663). Some Con- 
siderations Touching the Usefulnesse of Experi- 
mental Naturall Philosophy. Oxford. 
CALMEIL, L. F. (1845). De la Folie. Paris. 
Historie. London. 
p. 149. 
2, 363. Enthusiasme. London. 
