  University of California Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Chymia.
http://www.jstor.org
Sir Kenelm Digby, Alchemist, Scholar, Courtier, and Man of Adventure 
Author(s): Wyndham Miles 
Source:   Chymia, Vol. 2 (1949), pp. 119-128
Published by:  University of California Press
Stable URL:  http://www.jstor.org/stable/27757138
Accessed: 07-02-2016 01:08 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 131.91.169.193 on Sun, 07 Feb 2016 01:08:17 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
SIR KENELM DIGBY, ALCHEMIST, SCHOLAR, 
COURTIER, AND MAN&OF ADVENTURE* 
WYNDHAM MILES** 
ONE of the most versatile Englishmen of the 17th century was 
Sir Kenelm Digby, alchemist, author, adventurer, and poli 
tician, who, although almost unknown today, was in his 
time famous throughout England and the continent. He 
was the descendant of an old British family, being born in 1603, three 
years before his father was drawn and quartered for being convicted 
of treason in the gunpowder plot. 
Young Digby received his education at Oxford, where he made such 
an impression on his tutor, the famous mathematician Thomas Allen, 
that the latter called him the Mir?ndola of his age.1 He stayed at the 
college for two years, finally leaving in 1620, without receiving a degree. 
His departure from Oxford was at the request of his mother who sent 
him to Europe in an effort to separate him from Venetia Stanley, an 
extremely beautiful girl with whom he had fallen in love. However, 
his mother's strategy worked but temporarily, for after touring the 
continent he returned to England and married Venetia in 1625. While 
on his travels in Spain he met Prince Charles (afterward King 
Charles I) whom he accompanied back to England, and it was prob 
ably this friendship that was responsible for his being knighted a few 
days after his return. 
In 1627, Digby resolved to embark on a privateering expedition, 
probably for the purpose of increasing the family fortune. He first 
tried to obtain official support from the king, but this failed and he 
sailed from England in January, 1628, with two ships, the Eagle and 
the Elisabeth and George. With a status little better than that of a 
pirate he headed into the Mediterranean where he chased and searched 
the ships that came within sight of his lookouts. In March, after a 
severe fight, he captured a Flemish vessel, and in April he took his 
fleet into the harbor at Cagliari and up to the walls of the fort, where 
his gunners drove the defenders back from their positions. On the 
* Presented in part before the Division of the History of Chemistry of the 
American Chemical Society, 112th meeting, New York, 1947. 
** The Pennsylvania State Colleee, State Colleere. Pennsylvania. 
1 "Brief Lives, chiefly of contemporaries, set down by John Aubrey, between 
the years 1669 and 1696," edited by Andrew Clark, Oxford, 1898, Vol. 1, p. 225. 
119 
This content downloaded from 131.91.169.193 on Sun, 07 Feb 2016 01:08:17 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
120 CHYMIA 
eleventh of June he sailed into Scanderoon,2 a Turkish harbor on the 
coast of Syria, and began a battle that made him famous throughout 
England. 
In the forenoone my boate came back to me, who brought me certaine 
news that in the roade were 4 French vessels, whereof one was come in but a 
day before, and had still one hundred thousand reals of eight aboard her; 
that withall there were 2 English shippes, 2 Venice galliegrosses, and 2 of 
their galliones. I stood in with the roade as fast as I could, but before, I 
sent my sattia with letters to the Venetian generall and the English captaines, 
to acquaint them who I was, contriving it so that my letters should be de 
livered even as I came within shott. The Venetian generall treated my men 
ill, and sent me word he would sinke my shippes if I went not out of the 
roade. He did his best, and shott att my flagge, but after I had endured 8 
shotte from him patiently, and saluted him with gonnes, I then fell upon his 
vessels with all my might. It continued a cruell fight for about 3 houres. It 
was most part calme, else I had offended him much more. Towards night the 
wind freshed; then I prepared to bord the galliones, and so meant to stemme 
the galeazzes, for I could easily gett the wind of them, having much maimed 
their oares, and they being so frighted (as it appeared by their working and 
the issue) that they lost all their advantages. Then the generall sent to me 
beseeching peace, and acknowledging his error in a very abject manner, 
having hoisted his yards to be gone out of the roade in case I refused it. I 
had taken then all but one (French), who was runne aground.3 
After the battle at Scanderoon the expedition turned homeward. 
At the island of Milo they put in for a few days, and here Digby wrote 
his memoirs, from which we obtained most of our information on his 
early life. In these memoirs, which were first printed in 1827, by Sir 
Harris Nicolas, a British antiquary, from an original manuscript in the 
British Museum, Digby told of his romance with Venetia Stanley 
with such freedom that the 19th century editor felt obliged to abridge 
the account and had the deleted passages printed privately.4 
A few years after the fleet returned to England, Digby's wife died. 
After her death, to avoyd envy and scandall, he retired in to Gresham 
College at London, where he diverted himselfe with his chymistry, and the 
professors' good conversation. He wore there a long mourning cloake, a high 
crowned hatt, his beard unshorne, look't like a hermite, as signes of sorrowe 
2 Scanderoon is known to modern gazetteers as Alexandretta. 
3 
Digby, Kenelm, "Journal of a Voyage into the Mediterranean," edited by 
John Bruce, printed from the Camden Society, n. p., 1868, pp. 38-39. 
4 "Private Memoirs of Sir Kenelm Digby, gentleman of the bedchamber to 
King Charles the First, written by himself," edited by Harris Nicolas, London, 1827. 
"Castrations from the private memoirs of Sir Kenelm Digby," edited by Harris 
Nicolas, n. p., 1828. This is reprinted in full in "Sir Kenelm Digby and his Venetia," 
E. W. Bligh, London, 1932, pp. 283-300. 
This content downloaded from 131.91.169.193 on Sun, 07 Feb 2016 01:08:17 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
