An Introduction to the History of the Law of Real Property. With Original Authorities by
Kenelm Edward Digby; William Montagu Harrison
Review by: R. G. D.
Harvard Law Review, Vol. 13, No. 1 (Apr. 25, 1899), pp. 65-66
Published by: The Harvard Law Review Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1322686 .
Accessed: 23/05/2014 10:39
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
The Harvard Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Harvard Law Review.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.57 on Fri, 23 May 2014 10:39:42 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
REVIEWS. 65 
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE LAW OF REAL PROPERTY. 
With Original Authorities. By Kenelrn Edward Digby, M. A., 
assisted by William' Montagu Harrison, M. A. Fifth Edition. 
Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. London: Henry Frowde. I897. 
pp. xiv. 448. 
A new edition of a work so well known as Digby's History of the Law 
of Real Property might be dismissed without extended comment. Espe- 
cially is this so in the present instance, as the changes from the last 
edition are practically limited to revision in the light of Pollock and 
Maitland's History of English Law. But the book is such a good one, 
that even under these circumstances some space may perhaps be justi- 
fiably devoted to it. 
Mr. D)igby is one of those who find the source of the English manorial, 
system in the Teutonic village community rather than in any Roman 
prototype. To an account of the growth of this system from its begin- 
nings under the Anglo-Saxons to its final development after the conquest 
he devotes the early part of his book. Though his method of incorpo- 
rating copious extracts from Glanvill and Bracton in his text, to such an 
extent as to make his own work at times extremely fragmentary, renders 
this portion of the book less readable than might be desired, yet it is 
needless to say that it contains much that is of interest to the unlearned. 
One may read here of the origin of dower in the marriage gift of land or 
chattels from the husband to his wife; of the change by which the interest 
of a lessee for years grew from a mere contract right against the lessor to 
a property right against the world, and still did not lose its original 
character as part of the personal estate; of the early conception of servi- 
tudes as so far partaking of the nature of freehold rights that tlle appro-. 
priate remedy for their disturbance was the assize of novel disseisin; of 
the distinction between the notion of a remainder, peculiar to English 
law, and the. "substitutioni" of some of the systems based on the civil 
law. 
Perhaps the most satisfactory part of the book is that which deals with 
the origin of uses and the effect of the Statute. The curiously scholastic 
spirit in which the latter was construed, and the realistic conception of a 
use which led to the doctrine of the non-applicability of the statute to a 
"use on a use"i are interestingly treated. " The curious point is that 
these effects of the Statute of Uses are the result, not of consideration of 
public policy influencing either the legislature or the tribunals, but of the 
supposed logical consequences of the metaphysical conception of a use." 
p. 371, note. 
'The author occasionally asserts views the soundness of which, in the 
light of recent criticism, may certainly be questioned. For example, he 
speaks (p. 364) of the so-called rule that an estate cannot be limited to 
the unborn son of an unborn person as something entirely distinct from 
the rule against perpetuities. And on page 361 he says that if a limita- 
tion could be regarded as a remainder, it became settled law that it could 
not be regarded as a springing or a shifting use, even though void as a 
remainder. Mr. Gray, in his book on Perpetuities, has pointed out that 
the application under such circumstances of the doctrine that future 
limitations should be construed as remainders wherever possible, not 
only seemed " the very wantonness of destruction," but was not required 
by the authorities. 
9 
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.57 on Fri, 23 May 2014 10:39:42 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
66 HARVARD LAW REVIEW. 
But, on the whole, Mr. Digby's work is careful and scholarly, and no- 
where else can one find so much learning on the history of our land law 
compressed into so small a space. R. G. D. 
A TREATISE ON THE LAW OF CONTRACT OF PLEDGE. As governed by 
both the Common Law and the Civil Law. By Henry Denis. 
New Orleans: F. F. Hansell & Bro., Ltd. I898. pp. XXXi, 6I9. 
This book is not in any way an attempt to write a comprehensive text- 
book on the law of pledge, - it aims simply at an examination of the pre- 
sent state of the common law on the subject in comparison with the 
civil law from which it is largely derived, and with the later forms of the 
civil law, - particularly the Louisiana Code. In the civil law pledges 
are a definite branch of the law clearly understood and worked out; in 
the common law on the other hand the subject is constantly confused 
with the general topic of bailments and with mortgages of chattels. And 
a comparison of the two systems is the more valuable and necessary, be- 
cause the civil law has been so often half understood and misunderstood 
by the common law commentators, - notably by Story. 
To set right these errors, to give a clear analytical comparison of the 
two systems, - so much this book has aimed at and accomplished. 
The differences are noted, the relative advantages commented upon, the 
diverging tendencies clearly pointed out. The whole method of the 
book is scientific, the work careful and systematic, the style admirably 
terse and straightforward, and if didactic, at least convincing. It is to 
be regretted that the citation of cases are so infrequent, and the refer- 
ences to the common law commentators so many, and again that the 
author has seen fit to place so little emphasis on tracing the growth of 
the law regarding pledges in the two systems. 
This summary treatment and lack of attention to recent cases has led, 
in at least one instance, to actual error, p. 206, where it is stated as estab- 
lished American law, that the pledgee may repledge without consent of 
the pledgor, - the question is still an open one in many jurisdictions. 
Yet on the whole the book cannot fail to lead to a clearer understanding 
of the common law in regard to pledges. 
J. P. C., JR. 
BOOKS RECEIVED. 
[Entry under this head does not freciude further notice of a iook in this or in a later num6er 
of the Revw.] 
A TREATISE ON THE LAW OF THE CON- 
TRACT OF PLEDGE. - By Heniry Denis. 
New Orleans: F. F. Hansell & Bro. 
T898. 
REPORT OF THE TWENTY-FIRST AN- 
NUAL MEETING OF THE AMERICAN 
BAR ASSOCIATION. Philadelphia: Dan- 
do Printing and Publishing Co. I898. 
THE FEDERAL COURTS. By Charles V. 
Simonton. 2d edition. Richmond, Va. 
B. F. Johnson Publishing Co. I898. 
THE JURISDICTION OF THE FEDERAL 
COURTS. By Howard M. Carter. 
Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 1899. 
THE LAW OF PARTNERSHIP. By Francis 
M. Burdick. Boston: Little, Brown & 
Co. I899. 
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.57 on Fri, 23 May 2014 10:39:42 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
