Sir Kenelm Digby: The Ornament of England (1603-1665) by R. T. Petersson
Review by: Dorothy Stimson
Isis, Vol. 48, No. 3, The George Sarton Memorial Issue (Sep., 1957), pp. 381-382
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of The History of Science Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/226497 .
Accessed: 10/06/2014 22:05
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
The University of Chicago Press and The History of Science Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Isis.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 62.122.73.122 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:05:59 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
BOOK REVIEWS 38I 
R. T. PETERSSON: Sir Kenelm Digby: 
The Ornament of England (I603-I665). 
366 pp., front., 3 pl. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1956. $6.oo. 
Twenty-five years ago Marjorie Nicol- 
son referring to "that lovable and erratic en- 
thusiast, Sir Kenelm Digby, of 'powder of 
sympathy' fame," stated that "consciously 
or unconsciously he was an important link 
between English and continental thought; 
most of all he was one of the best letter- 
writers of an age which excelled in the art" 
(Conway Letters, xxiv, i i). Only now has 
a full-scale biography of him appeared, the 
first in sixty years. 
This biography, an expansion of a doctoral 
dissertation, is the product of much research. 
It is at its best in the author's own field 
of English language and literature (Mr. 
Petersson is a member of that department 
at Smith College). To him Sir Kenelm was 
the last of the universal men of the Renais- 
sance, an excellent amateur who lived on 
into the rapidly changing era that led into 
modem specialism. Not only the conditions 
of his life but also an inner restlessness of 
character kept him always active, never 
completely perfecting what he attempted. 
Haste betrayed him, and as Mr. Petersson 
remarks, he knew too many great men for 
his own good; he constantly measured him- 
self against them, to his own inner dis- 
satisfaction and fear of mediocrity or fail- 
ure. 
Sir Kenelm's wide-ranging travels and his 
varied experiences as royalist exile, prot6g6 
of queens, duelist, leader of a piratical ex- 
pedition into eastern Mediterranean waters, 
envoy to the pope (whom he "hectored"), 
friend of philosophers, scientists, diplomats, 
conspirators, and devoted lover of his beauti- 
ful Venetia-such activities and interests 
provide fascinating material for his bi- 
ographer. They also complicate his problem 
by requiring a wide knowledge of England 
and the Near East, of Spain and of France, 
of diplomatic intricacies and of philosophic 
and scientific questions in the seventeenth 
century. Necessarily brief historical general- 
izations, therefore, are sometimes dubious; 
as, for example, about the Civil War of I642: 
"The social and economic motives in war 
had almost no influence" (pp. i6o-i6I). 
Then too, how could the Acad6mie des 
Sciences, not founded as such till i666, have 
"given up" its studies of the chemical com- 
position of plants before Sir Kenelm read 
to the Royal Society in i66i his Discourse 
on the Vegetation of Plants (p. 298)? Nor 
was Sir Kenelm, strictly speaking, a founder 
of the Royal Society (p. 295), though 
elected a member in i66o, two weeks after 
the first meeting for organization. During 
the previous fifteen years or so, when the 
science-lovers had been coming together first 
in London and then in Oxford, Sir Kenelm 
had been in prison or in exile, returning to 
England only for brief visits until shortly 
before the Restoration. Of course he would 
have been a welcome addition to their 
group, primarily as "courtier" (as Mr. 
Petersson points out, they so identified him 
in their list of prospective members) and 
then as "chemist." For his Catholicism and 
his Stuart loyalties would have helped at 
court to offset the Puritan-Parliamentarian- 
ism of many of the members, even if he had 
not been keenly curious about "experimental 
philosophy." Such matters, however, are of 
minor importance. 
This biography as a whole is a useful 
addition to the studies of the seventeenth 
century for students of science and of litera- 
ture alike. For Sir Kenelm, no true scientist 
himself, like Haak, Hartlib, Oldenburg and 
particularly Pere Mersenne, played an im- 
portant role as a means of communication 
between scientists before scientific journals 
had been introduced. It was he who ac- 
quainted Hobbes with Descartes' Discours. 
A member of Mersenne's circle in Paris, he 
spread word of books and questions dis- 
cussed. He constantly purchased books, 
giving them to libraries as well as to friends. 
An enthusiast, he stirred others to like en- 
thusiasms. His biographer agrees with An- 
thony a Wood's comment: "Digby had 'a 
great faculty (which proceeds from abun- 
dance of wit and invention) of proposing and 
reporting matters of the virtuosi.'" For this 
above all, Petersson writes, he won his name 
in science (p. 30I). 
The general reader* should also enjoy 
making the acquaintance through this book 
of one of the most interesting men in a 
remarkable age. However, anyone wishing 
* In England the Book Society has recom- 
mended to its members the edition published 
by Jonathan Cape, London, I956. 
This content downloaded from 62.122.73.122 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:05:59 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
382 BOOK REVIEWS 
to use the extensive bibliographical and 
critical comments in the notes (pp. 328-350) 
should first provide himself with a magnify- 
ing glass. These are printed in type so 
small that they run eighty-two lines to the 
page. 
Stonington, Conn. DOROTHY STIMSON 
J. C. BEAGLEHOLE (editor): The Jour- 
nals of Captain Cook on His Voyages of 
Discovery. Volume I, The Voyage of the 
Endeavour. cclxxxiv + 684 pp. 45 ill. and 
maps, 7 appendices. Cambridge: for the 
Hakluyt Society by the Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, 1955. $15.00. 
R. A. SKELTON (editor): Charts and 
Views Drawn by Cook and His Officers 
and Reproduced from the Original Manu- 
scripts. Cambridge: for the Hakluyt So- 
ciety by the Cambridge University Press, 
I955. $9.50. 
It has been said that the "study of Cook 
is the illumination of all discovery." Yet, 
in spite of the voluminous and ever-growing 
body of literature on the great circumnavi- 
gator and his three voyages, the clear light 
which Cook's own journals might have shed 
on the problems of geographical discovery 
has long been denied the scholarly world by 
the particular editorial inclinations of his 
early publishers. From the technically inade- 
quate Dr. John Hawkesworth, who first in- 
troduced Cook to the eighteenth-century 
literati, to the proper Victorianism of Admiral 
Wharton's nineteenth-century edition, Cook 
has always suffered from the zealousness of 
editors anxious to censor, to improve or to 
interpret the plain and unpolished language 
of the sailor. 
Now, under the imprint of that society 
so long devoted to tales of travel and dis- 
covery, and almost two centuries after Cook 
first recorded his impressions of Pacific life 
and navigation, Dr. J. C. Beaglehole of Vic- 
toria University College, Wellington, presents 
us with the first of four projected volumes of 
a new edition of Captain Cook's journals. 
Published at the same time is a Portfolio of 
charts and drawings extracted from all three 
voyages. Although primarily devoted to the 
voyage of the Endeavour from I768 to I77I, 
this first volume also contains a I7 i-page 
general introduction to the series, a useful, 
20-page "Note on Polynesian History," and 
a scholarly, 7 i-page "Textual Introduction 
to the Journal." In addition, there is brief 
discussion of the printing and annotation of 
the text, and a section by R. A. Skelton 
on "The Graphic Records" involved. In 
short, *the twentieth-century publication of 
the Cook journals is launched with all the 
critical apparatus that modem scholarship 
can command, and the hand that has sent 
the enterprise down the ways is extraordina- 
rily able. 
The particular circumstance which called 
Cook's first south-seas' expedition into be- 
ing was the rare opportunity of observing 
the second of the two transits of Venus of 
the century. If ever a man was properly 
chosen for this task, Cook was that man. 
By I768, he was an able navigator and a 
marine surveyor of wide experience, having 
already produced charts of the St. Lawrence 
that were standard for a century thereafter, 
and having spent some five years survey- 
ing the important Newfoundland waters. For 
several years before his presentation to the 
Royal Society he had exercised an inde- 
pendent command, and in I766 he added still 
another achievement to his growing stature 
by observing the solar eclipse of that year 
and applying its results to a calculation of 
the longitude of Newfoundland. Indeed, the 
Council of the Royal Society could look to 
its own Philosophical Transactions of I767 
for the communication of that accomplish- 
ment, and the illuminating comment of Dr. 
John Bevis that the observer was "a good 
mathematician and very expert in his busi- 
ness." 
If the problems of astronomy precipitated 
the commissioning of the Endeavour and the 
advancement of James Cook to a lieutenancy 
as its commander, the voyage itself was 
not wholly undertaken for this single science. 
The presence of Daniel Carl Solander, 
Joseph Banks and their entourage aboard 
ship expressed a larger scientific concern. 
For as John Ellis, F.R.S., wrote to Linnaeus: 
No people ever went to sea better fitted out for the purpose of Natural History. They have got a fine library of Natural History; 
they have all sorts of machines for catching and preserving insects; all kinds of nets, trawls, 
drags and hooks for coral fishing, they have 
even a curious contrivance of a telescope, by 
This content downloaded from 62.122.73.122 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:05:59 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
