The Circulation of the Brain and Spinal Cord: A Symposium on Blood
Supply. The Proceedings of the Association, New York, December 27th
and 28th, 1937. Editorial Board: Stanley Cobb, M.D., Chairman, Angus
M. Frantz, M.D., Wilder Penfield, M.D., and Henry A. Riley, M.D. Asso-
ciation for Research in Nervous and Mental Disease, Vol. XVIII of a
Series of Research Publications. Cloth. Price, $10. Pp. 790, with 282
illustrations. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins Company, 1938.
This volume includes the papers presented at the meeting of
the Association for Research in Nervous and Mental Disease
which met in New York, Dec. 27 and 28, 1937. There are
twenty-six separate papers, or chapters, and a critical discussion
of the entire symposium by Dr. Stanley Cobb. The subject
matter has been divided into three sections: (1)anatomy and
physiology, (2) pathology and (3) clinical contributions.
Although much of the material is not new and most of it has
been presented in separate publications elsewhere, this volume
will prove of particular value for ready reference and to
persons who do not have good library facilities available.
Chapter iv, "The Capillary Bed of the Paraventricular and
Supra-Optic Nuclei of the Hypothalamus," by K. H. Finley, is
well prepared and most interesting. Finley has shown that these
nuclei have a capillary bed which, except for a nucleus in the
brain stem, is more dense than any other region of the central
nervous system. This is undoubtedly of considerable functional
significance. Chapter v on "The Cerebral Vessels studied by
Angiography," by A. R. Elvidge, is undoubtedly the best
presentation of the subject of cerebral arteriography available
in English. Chapter vu, "The Innervation of the Intercra-
nial Blood Vessels and Durai Sinuses," by F. L. McNaughton,
is a full and useful presentation. Chapter x, "The Action
of Chemical Substances on Cerebral Blood Vessels," by C. F.
Schmidt and J.P. Hendrix, is worthy of careful study by all
who are interested in the subject of cerebral circulation.
Chapter xn, "The Influence of Circulation on the Activity of
Nerve Cells," by D. W. Bronk, and chapter xin, "Brain
Metabolism and Circulation," by R. W. Gerard, indicate the
importance of the circulation for the maintenance and alteration
of nervous activity. Chapter xiv, "Focal Alterations in Sub-
cortical Circulation Resulting from Stimulation of the Cerebral
Cortex," by von Santha and Cipriani, describes a series of
experiments which demonstrate that localized electrical stimu¬
lation of the cerebral cortex is associated with sharply localized
vasodilatation in the related subcortical centers. The caudate
nucleus, the thalamus and the geniculate bodies were studied.
These experiments confirmed the localized projection of the
various nuclei of the thalamus as established by the physiologic
studies of Dusser de Barenne and the anatomic studies of
Le Gros Clark and of Walker. In chapter xxi, Soma Weiss
presents a thorough review of the physiology of the carotid
sinus mechanism and its clinical significance. Chapter xxn,
"The Circulation of the Epileptic Brain," by Wilder Penfield,
presents this author's extensive experience with the vascularity
of such brains as observed at operation. The observations of
Graham and Wolff in chapter xxin on the mechanism of
migraine headache are important in the study and understanding
of this obscure condition. The concluding discussion by Dr.
Cobb will prove of value not only in summarizing and crystal¬
lizing the material presented but in a critical evaluation of it
as well. This chapter adds greatly to the value of the book.
A footnote by Dr. Cobb, to be found on page 728,is worthy of
preservation and fuller circulation : "Physics, anatomy, physiol¬
ogy and neurology are merely convenient administrative terms
used to designate certain departments in a university. To believe
that such terms have any biological significance is to surrender
to the academicians ! Biological data should not be classified
departmentally ; the facts apply to living organisms and may
have significance for many departments of science."
Preclinical Medicine: Preclinical States and Prevention of Disease. By
Malford W. Thewlis, M.D., Attending Specialist, General Medicine, United
States Public Health Hospitals, New York City. Cloth. Price, $3. Pp.
223, with 12 illustrations. Baltimore: William Wood & Company, 1939.
In the preface, Dr. Thewlis grants that there is no clearcut
demarcation between clinical and preclinical medicine and, of
course, that is evident throughout the book. A rather disap-
pointing feature is the inclusion everywhere of so much mate-
rial regarding disease prevention. Of course there is no subject
more important than disease prevention, but this is supposed
to be a book on preclinical medicine. The author evidently
wants to get a vast amount of information before his readers.
One result of this is a short, jerky style which may be for-
given, but it leads to such short, snappy sentences as "The
next worldwide epidemic of influenza is expected in 1948."
There is no word of explanation or any connection with any-
thing except the general subject of influenza. Every pioneer
makes the way easier for the next comers. Dr. Thewlis is
actually pioneering in preclinical medicine. There are cer-
tainly preclinical states in medicine and they are certainly of
great importance. The next books will be better because Dr.
Thewlis has had the courage to make the beginning.
Children with Delayed or Defective Speech: Motor-Kinesthetic Factors
in Their Training. By Sara M. Stinchfield, University of Southern Cali-
fornia, and Edna Hill Young, Principal, Hill-Young School of Speech,
Los Angeles, California. Cloth. Price, $3. Pp. 174, with illustrations.
Stanford University, California: Stanford University Press; London :
Oxford University Press, 1938.
Here is a technical work on delayed speech development and
the practical therapy for overcoming it used in the Hill-Young
School of Speech. In the therapy, interest is centered on speech
movements and word patterns. The appendix provides numer-
ous illustrations showing what is meant by this technic.
So You're Going to Stop Smoking! By J. C. Furnas. Second edition.
Cloth. Price, $1.25. Pp. 97. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1939.
The author, who is neither a physician nor a psychologist,
collected information about smoking by sending letters to a
number of celebrities asking them about the smoke habit. He
has collected also a good deal of data both from physicians and
from medical literature on smoking and what it does to you
and for you. In an appendix are some choice sentences chosen
from some of the questionnaires and an abstract of replies.
Some of these data are interesting. It is interesting to know
that John Charles Thomas chewed tobacco, that Henry L.
Mencken has 100 pipes, that Rupert Hughes smokes incessantly
while awake and that most celebrities haven't the slightest idea
what they like about smoking but a lot of them know what
they dislike.
On and Off the Campus. By Guy Stanton Ford. With a biographical
introduction by George E. Vincent. Cloth. Price, $4. Pp. 511, with
portrait. Minneapolis : The University of Minnesota Press ; London :
Oxford University Press, 1938.
This volume was published to honor Dean Ford's twenty\x=req-\
fifth anniversary as head of the graduate school of the Univer-
sity of Minnesota. There is an introductory biographic sketch
in appreciation by Dr. George E. Vincent. The collected writ-
ings included are divided into essays having to do with Dr.
Ford's contributions as a publicist, historian, educational admin-
istrator and editor. The editorials are reprinted from Sunday
editions of the Minneapolis Journal, except the one which
appeared in the St. Paul Pioneer Press. They are written in
substantial, direct English and they are inspiring. Some of
them are witty and the wit penetrates.
Sir Kenelm Digby: Writer, Bibliophile and Protagonist of William
Harvey. By John F. Fulton, M.D. Cloth. Pp. 75,with 7 illustrations.
New York: Peter & Katharine Oliver, 1937.
This paper was read before the Grolier Club in April 1937.
It is artistically printed and handsomely illustrated and con-
cerns a great literary figure who was also a physiologist and
a philosopher. He was among the first to appreciate the impor-
tance of the discovery by William Harvey of the circulation
of the blood and he was a strong advocate of that doctrine.
The volume is printed in a special edition of only 300 copies and
should be a prize to have in the library.
The Wisdom of the Body. By Walter B. Cannon, M.D., Sc.D., LL.D.,
George Higginson Professor of Physiology, Harvard Medical School, Bos-
ton. Second edition. Cloth. Price, $3.50. Pp. 333, with 40 illustra-
tions. New York : W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1939.
The first edition of this book was published in 1932. The
present is a revised and enlarged edition, in which a report of
additional researches, particularly all the work on homeostasis,
is included. The volume is written with the quality, the
accuracy and the thoroughness that have always characterized
Dr. Cannon's contributions.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Simon Fraser University User  on 06/10/2015
