JEMS 8 (2019), 1: 117–139
Common Conceptions and 
the Metaphysics of Material 
Substance:Domingo de Soto,  
Kenelm Digby and Johannes de Raey
Han Thomas Adriaenssen
University of Groningen
h.t.adriaenssen@rug.nl
Abstract: This paper explores how, according to three early modern philos -
ophers, philosophical theory should relate to our pre-theoretical picture of 
reality. Though coming from very different backgrounds, the Spanish scholas-
tic, Domingo de Soto, and the English natural philosopher, Kenelm Digby, 
agreed that an ability to accommodate our pre-theoretical picture of the world 
and our ordinary way of speaking about reality is a virtue for a philosophi -
cal theory. Yet at the same time, they disagreed on what kind of ontology of 
the material world is implied by these. The Dutch Cartesian, Johannes de 
Raey, took a very different approach, and argued that the picture of reality we 
naturally develop from our early days onwards and the language associated 
with it have their use in domains such as law and medical practice, but are a 
poor guide to the ontology of the material world. Thus, if we are to arrive at 
a proper understanding of the nature of matter, we need to move beyond the 
picture of reality we naturally develop from our early days onwards in order to 
come to see that the nature of matter consists in bare extension.
Keywords: Domingo de Soto, Kenelm Digby, Johannes de Raey, common 
notions, real accidents, prime matter
How should philosophy relate to our pre-theoretical picture of reality? On 
one view, philosophy takes its cues from this picture, and tries to spell out in 
detail what it has to say about good and evil, knowledge, and the nature of 
the ordinary objects we see around us. On a competing view, the very point 
of philosophy is to move beyond our pre-theoretical picture of reality, and 
to point out where it stands in need of correction. By looking at three case 
studies, this paper will illustrate how both of these views can be found in early 

 
118 Han Thomas Adriaenssen
modern discussions of the ontology of material reality. These case studies will 
not only deepen our knowledge of the role played by appeals to what was 
often called our common or natural picture of reality, but will also remind us 
of a philosophical problem that such appeals face.
The first author we will look at is the Spanish Dominican, Domingo de 
Soto.1 Though little known today, Soto was the author of an influential com-
mentary on the Sentences as well as an important treatise on the Aristotelian 
categories. One of the issues he addressed in these works was the ontological 
status of the accidents of material substances. Are these accidents real beings 
over and above the substances whose accidents they are, as realists claim? Or 
do accidents somehow reduce to substances, as nominalists submit? As we will 
see, Soto argued that at least some accidents are real and have a being of their 
own over and above that of their bearers. This kind of realism was of course 
not new with Soto. But what makes his defence of realism of interest for pres-
ent purposes, is the way in which it appeals to what he called our common 
way of conceiving of things. According to Soto indeed, our common way of 
conceiving of reality suggests a realist view of at least some accidents. 
The second author we will look at is the English courtier and philosopher, 
Sir Kenelm Digby.2 An early member of the Royal Society, Digby has been 
described as one of the most influential philosophers of his time3 and as the 
first to offer a full statement of an atomist system of natural philosophy in the 
English language.4 But even if he was in many ways at the forefront of the new 
philosophy of the century, Digby at the same time remained firmly attached 
to the legacy of Aristotle, which he believed could well go hand in hand with 
the innovations that were taking place in the science and philosophy of his 
time. 
One point where Digby took himself to agree with Aristotle, was that the 
bodies we see around us are best described as substances endowed with acci -
dents of nine sorts. This view naturally led him to consider the ontological sta-
tus of the accidental categories. As we will see, Digby was critical of category 
realism here, and argued that it was in part the product of an artificial way of 
describing material reality. The natural picture of reality common to all men, 
1 On the career and work of Soto (1494–1560), see David Jiménez Castaño, “Domingo 
de Soto. Una breve bibliografía para iniciarse en el estudio de su obra y de su pensamiento,” 
Azafea. Revista de filosofia 18 (2016), pp. 113–128.
2 On the life and work of Digby (1603–1655), see Vittorio Gabrieli, Sir Kenelm Digby. 
Un inglese italianato nell’età della controriforma, Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1957.
3 Antonio Clericuzio, Elements, Principles and Corpuscles: A Study of Atomism and Chemistry 
in the Seventeenth Century, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2000, p. 81. 
4 On Digby’s contribution to atomism in England see Robert Kargon, Atomism in England 
from Harriot to Newton, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966, pp. 66–67.    
                 Common Conceptions and the Metaphysics of Material Substance 119
he believed, suggested an ontology in which accidents are not beings in their 
own right over and above the substances whose accidents they are.  
 The cases of Soto and Digby are telling in at least two ways. First, the 
case of Soto reminds us that, for all the criticism they would later receive, 
doctrines such as category realism were at least in part the result of an attempt 
to spell out in detail the ontological commitments of what was seen to be a 
natural and common way of conceiving of reality. Second, the cases of Soto 
and Digby raise a philosophical question about the weight appeals to this way 
of conceiving can carry. For the moment we find one author appealing to the 
common way of conceiving of things to defend a form of category realism 
and another to deny it, the notion of a natural or common way of conceiving 
of the material world begins to look rather flexible indeed. In fact, it begins 
to look doubtful whether there are any truly natural and common views of 
the ontological status of accidents at all, over and above the views common 
to those in the nominalist camp and those in the realist camp already. If the 
answer to this question is no, the philosophical value of appeals to a common 
or natural way of conceiving of the world seems to be limited at best.  
This at any rate appears to have been the view of one of the most eminent 
Dutch Cartesians of the seventeenth century, Johannes de Raey. 5 As we will 
see, de Raey believed that the task of philosophy is not so much to build on, 
as to replace our pre-theoretical picture of reality. Our pre-theoretical ideas 
about the way the world is and the language in which it is typically couched, 
de Raey maintained, are useful tools to navigate the demands of everyday life. 
But they are a burden to progress in the theoretical disciplines of science and 
philosophy. 
1. Soto on Accident Realism and the Common Way of Conceiving of Material 
Reality
According to Soto, we describe the material world in terms of the Aris -
totelian ten categories. Material reality is populated by substances endowed 
with accidents falling under nine broad categories, that is. But what is the 
5 On de Raey (1622–1702) in the context of Dutch Cartesianism, see Tad Schmaltz, Early 
Modern Cartesianisms: Dutch and French Constructions, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017, 
pp. 77–83. According to de Raey, to follow Descartes need not be to turn away from Aristotle. 
As he argued in several of his works, the philosophy of Aristotle had been perverted by his 
scholastic readers, and the difference between Aristotle and Descartes was often smaller than 
that between Aristotle and the scholastics. See Christia Mercer, Leibniz’s Metaphysics: Its Origins 
and Developments, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 107–109 for discussion. 
Digby and de Raey would likely have agreed on this point. Yet as we will see towards the end 
of this paper, they at the same time disagreed on fundamental points of methodology as well 
as doctrine.   
