18 NOTES AND QUERIES. [No. 63.
30/., and other like sums, for a copy ; whereas, as
many shillings is about the value of the later
editions.
Tiie notes by the Reformers from the margin
of the Geneva version, have been reprinted with
what is usually called King James' version, the one
now in use, in the editions printed at Amsterdam,
at the beginning of the seventeenth century.
POEMS DISCO VEBED AMONG THE PAPEBS OP SIB
KEN ELM DICBY.
MB. HAXMWEIX (Vol. ii., p. 238.) says that he
does not believe my MS. of the "Minde of the
Lady Venetia Digby" can be an autograph. I
have reason to think that he is right from discover-
ing another MS. written in the same hand as the
above, and containing two poems without date or
signature* neither of which (I believe) are Ben
Jonson's. I enclose the shorter of the two, and
should feel obliged if any of your correspondents
could tell ine the author.of it, as this would throw
some light upon the writer of the two MSS.
THE I1OURECLASSE.
Doe but consider this small dust running in thisglasse,
By atoms moved;
Would you believe that this the body ever was
Of one that loved ;
Who in his mistresse flames playing like a fly,
Burnt to cinders by her eye ?
Yes ! and in death as life unblest,
To have it exprest
Even ashes of lovers have no rest.
I also enclose a copy of another poem I have
discovered, which appears to me very curious,
and, from the date, written the very year of the
visit of Prince Charles and Buckingham to the
court of Spain. Has it ever been printed, and
who is the author ?
What sodaine change hath dark't of late
The glory of the Arcadian state?
The fleecy flocks refuse to feede,
The Lambes to play, the Ewes to breede,
The altars make(s) the olferinges burne
That Jack and Tom may safe returne.
The Springe neglectes his course to keepe,
The Ayre continual stormes do weepe,
Birdes disdaine to singe,
S?1 to sm''e> 'he woods to springe,
iBJqahtaines droppe, the valleys morne
^ Jacfcand Tom do safe retume.
iyat be that mov'd this woe?
ojc want afflicts Arcadia so?
^lYiopeof Greece, the proppe of artes,
'ri7?.r:f\\V;asrprrp*'*.Jack, the joy of hartes.
^'\ $yttt/?'o'1tt wns to his Royall Paw
'•L—^yiijk tritSJy swayne, his chicfest maw.
:'**>:•«••'
The loftye Toppes of Menalus
Did shake with wimle from Meiperus,
Whose swede delitious Ayre did fly
'liirongh all the Boundes of Arcadv,
Which inov'd a vaine in Jack and Tom
To see the coast the winde caine from.
This winde was love, which Princes state
To Pages turn, but who can hate
Where equall fortune love procures,
Or equal! love success assures?
So virtuous Jack shall bring from Greece
The Beautyous prize, the Golden fleece.
Love is a world of many paines,
Where coldest hills, and hottest playnes,
With barren rockes and fertill fieldes
By turne despaire and eomforte yeldes;
But who can doubt of prosperous lucke •
Where Love and fortune both conducte?
Thy GrandEire great, and father too,
Were thine examples thus to doe,
Whose brave attempts, in heate of love,
Both France and Denmark did approve.
For Jack and Tom do nothing nene
When Love and Fortune they pursue.
Kind shepheardes that have lov'd them long,
Be not rashe in censuringe wronge,
Correct your feares, leave of to mourne,
The Heavens will favour their returne ;
Committ your cares to Royall Pan,
For Jack his sonne and Tom his man.
FINIS.
From London, 31. Martii, 1623.
Prefaced to this poem is an extract from a letter
of Buckingham's to his wife, containing an account
of their reception; but it is hardly worth copying.
H. A. B.
WORKS OF CAMOENS.
Having been requested by a foreign nobleman
to furnish him with a list of the editions of the
works of Camoens, and of the various translations,
I have prepared one; and considering the in-
formation might be interesting to several of your
readers, I send you a copy for insertion It be-
sides affords an opportunity of asking after those
editions, to which I have added the observations.
The first star indicates that the works are in my
private collection, as are several other works re-
lating to that celebrated poet. Obras means the
collected works. Joan ADAMSON.
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Dec. 16. 1S5O.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/s1-III/63/18/4482298 by Universite de STRASBOURG Service Commun de Documentation user on 07 May 2019

