January, 1970 NOTES AND QUERIES 15
that this monophthongal pronunciation was
common in the unstudied speech of all
classes. It is probable that the game of
Spoil-Five, under the name of " Maw ", was
brought back to England by soldiers,12
whose language is unlikely to have met with
the approval of the orthoepists. In its com-
bination of mistranslation and reproduction
of the Irish equivalent, the phrase heaving
of the Maw gives, in fact, a vivid picture
of social intercourse between English soldiers
and their Irish allies in the sixteenth century.
University College,
Dublin.
A. J. BLISS.
12 Another game brought back from Ireland may
be Irish, referred to in the quotation dated 1600
above; it is a form of backgammon, and is
described in Cotton's Chapter xxvi (Hartmann,
pp. 74-5). It is barely possible that Mack referred
to in the first three quotations above, may also
be of Irish origin; but mack " Irishman " first
occurs considerably later; see O.E.D., s.v. mack sb.3.
A FEATURE CHARACTERIZING
LANCELOT IN TENNYSON'S
"LANCELOT AND ELAINE"
NE of Tennyson's more interesting
smaller modifications to Malory occurs
when Lancelot is first viewed by Elaine:
Marred as he was, he seemed the goodliest man
That ever among ladies ate in hall,
And noblest, when she lifted up her eyes.
However marred, of more than twice her years,
Seamed with an ancient swordcut on the cheek,
And bruised and bronzed, she lifted up her eyes
And loved him, with that love which was her doom.
Midway through Malory's story of Elaine,
and immediately after the tournament at
which he had fought disguised and bearing
for emblem Elaine's red sleeve, Lancelot
goes to a hermit for cure of his wounds:
Then the hermit advised him better, and
saw by a wound on his cheek that he was
Sir Launcelot. Alas, said the hermit, mine
own lord why layne you your name from
me? Forsooth I ought to know you of
right, for ye are the most noblest knight
of the world, for well I know you for Sir
Launcelot.1
Nowhere else in Malory is Lancelot identi-
fied by a wound or cut on his cheek. In
transferring from the hermit to Elaine this
identifying feature, in making it longstand-
i Lancelot and Elaine, 253-59, and EverymanMalory, Book XVIII, Ch. xiii.
ing and caused by a sword, Tennyson con-
trasts the state of warrior and maiden as
viewed so fatally by the latter. In fact the
scar virtually becomes a focus for this love
at first sight. It is yet another sign of the
skill and economy, even to the smallest de-
tail, with which Tennyson modified his
Arthurian sources. j j^ GRAY.
McMaster University.
SIR KENELM DIGBY
IN HAWTHORNE'S
"THE MAN OF ADAMANT"
ALBERT S. REID has shown from The
-**• Scarlet Letter and "The Birthmark"
that Nathaniel Hawthorne was quite familiar
with the life and work of Sir Kenelm Digby.1
Thus far, however, it has gone unnoticed
that the name and fate of the central figure
in "The Man of Adamant" also provide a
link with this famous seventeenth-century
Englishman, and possibly a source for the
allegory.
The main character of "The Man of
Adamant" is Richard Digby, the Puritan
"saint" in extremis, and his story baldly
demonstrates that needless intolerance and
isolation can turn one to stone. Digby pro-
claims that only he knows the path to salva-
tion ; he repudiates the world, seeks the cold
and stony seclusion of a cave, and eventually
dies, forever frozen in the form of a human
stalagmite. Hawthorne, of course, is depict-
ing the human petrifaction which he felt
was inherent in Puritanism, and Arlin Turner
has already suggested Increase Mather's
Remarkable Providences as the probable
source of the climactic transformation.2
Mather's work does indeed mention two
cases in which foreign bodies were found
in the hearts of dead men, corresponding
to Digby's "deposition of calculous par-
ticles", and briefly states that "credible his-
tories report, that in Africa the bodies of
men (and of other animals) have been turned
into perfect stones", corresponding to
Digby's final status.3
i See Reid's The Yellow Ruff and The Scarlet
Letter (University of Florida Press, 1955), 93-94,
100, and "Hawthorne's Humanism: 'The Birth-
mark' and Sir Kenelm Digby", A.L., xxxviii (1966-
67), 337-51.
- "Hawthorne's Literary Borrowings". P.M.L.A..
li (1936), 550-51.
3 Increase Mather, Remarkable Providences
(London, 1890), 218.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/17/1/15-b/4605957 by Auckland University of Technology user on 06 May 2019

16 NOTES AND QUERIES January, 1970
It is certainly possible, of course, that
Hawthorne's imagination expanded upon
Mather's accounts, but the name "Digby"
ineluctably connects this story to Sir Kenelm
Digby, who, sometime shortly after 1657,
created quite a stir in England by publish-
ing a vivid account of a petrified city. Digby
asserted the presence "of a City in Barbary
under the King of Tripoli that was turned
into Stone in a very few hours by a petrify-
ing Vapor that fell upon the place, that is,
Men, Beasts, Trees, Houses, Utensils, etc.
every thing remaining in the same posture,
as Children at their Mothers Breasts, etc".4
It is immediately evident, I think, that
Digby's account of the human petrifaction
is more imaginatively provocative than
Mather's, and contains in germ Hawthorne's
"petrifying" moisture, and the final, repel-
lent, in-death-as-in-life stance of his central
character.
Digby, "The Pliny of our age for lying",
was ridiculed for this story, but he was later
vindicated in a paper read before the Royal
Society of London. The Biographia Britan-
nica, which Hawthorne withdrew from the
Salem Athenaeum in 1828, nine years before
"The Man of Adamant" was published and
one year after he first looked at Mather's
book, contains an account of this story and
the vindication.5
It seems probable, then, that this incident
in Digby's life was at least one germinating
force for "The Man of Adamant", and that
Digby thereby, through a process common
in the Hawthorne canon, provided the name
for the central character. Hawthorne's fiction
is replete with the names of real historical
figures, remotely but recognizably related
to their real life roles. It seems that Haw-
thorne often preferred a principle of per-
sonal association to haphazard naming of
his characters. The name "Malvin" of
"Roger Malvin's Burial", for instance, was
taken from an actual member of LovewelFs
band, but not one of those centrally in-
volved in the specific action from which
the story arose. The title figure of "My
Kinsman Major Molineux" was in reality
a radical mob leader, just the opposite of
* Anthony Wood, Aihenae Oxonienses (London,
1721), II, 352. Also see Thomas Longueville, The
Life of Sir Kenelm Digby (London, 1896), 286.
s Marion L. Kesselring, "Hawthorne's Reading,
1828-1850", B.N.Y.P.L., liii (1949), 175, 186.
Biographia Britannica. Ill, 1711; also see Longue-
ville, 286.
his fictive role. The names "Maule" and
"Pyncheon" in The House of the Seven
Gables can be found in the histories of
colonial New England, but the historical
Maule was only a pestiferous Quaker, not
a wizard, who was only imprisoned and not
hung. Reverend Blackstone of "The May-
pole of Merry Mount" was a real Anglican
clergyman, but there is absolutely no indi-
cation that he deserves the epithet "priest
of Baal" which Hawthorne gives him. The
appearance of Goody Cloyse, Goody Cory,
and Martha Carrier provides a touch of
realism for "Young Goodman Brown",
since all were actually accused of witchcraft
during the various trials of 1692.6
In the context of evidence such as this
from the body of Hawthorne's work, then,
it is not surprising that the name "Digby"
furnishes a clue to the source of "The Man
of Adamant". EDWARD J. GALLAGHER.
University of Notre Dame,
Indiana.
« G. H. Orians, "The Source of Hawthorne's
'Roger Malvin's Burial'", A.L., x (1938-39), 315;
Roy Harvey Pearce, "Hawthorne and the Sense
of the Past, or the Immortality of Major Molineux",
E.L.H., xxi (1954), 327-28; J. D. Phillips, Salem
in the Seventeenth Century (Boston, 1933); J.
Golden Taylor, Hawthorne's Ambivalence Toward
Puritanism (Utah State University Press, 1965),
33-35; Turner, 545.
THACKERAY AND
"DIE WAHLVERWANDTSCHAFTEN"
In Chapter 67 of Vanity Fair, Thackeray
writes of Rawdon Crawley as
only separated from his lady by one of
the trifling differences which are of little
account in a country where "Werther" is
still read, and the "Wahlverwandtschaften"
of Goethe is considered an edifying moral
book.
This does not necessarily argue any close
familiarity on Thackeray's part with either
novel, though he several times refers to
Werther, and, of course, there is his well-
known poem on the subject. But in Vanity
Fair itself there is one passage that may
be an echo of Die Wahlverwandtschaften.
It is difficult to be sure, since the image is
a fairly obvious one, and may, for all I
know, be earlier than either Goethe or
Thackeray.1 Certainly, both would be quite
capable of inventing it independently. How-
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/17/1/15-b/4605957 by Auckland University of Technology user on 06 May 2019

