8»8.VHI.JOW27.I35.) NOTES AND QUERIES. 67
Quttitu
We matt requeit eorreipondenti deilrinc information
on family matters of only private interest to affix their
ntmei and addreiiei to their queries, In order tbat the
aniwen may be addreued to them direct.
SIR KENELM DIGBT AND THE GREEN GLASS
MANUFACTURE.—The connexion of Digby with
tome improvement in the manufacture of bottles
has apparently escaped the notice of bis biographers.
The fact is brought to light in the ' Seventh Report
of the Hist. MSS. Oomm.,' p. 164, under the fol-
lowing circumstances : In or before 1662 a certain
John Colnett obtained a patent for glaas bottles
and procured & Bill confirming the patent, which
was bad for want of novelty at the date of the Rrant,
on the ground that in the late rebellious times the
patent could not be immediately obtained. A peti-
tion against the Bill was filed by John Vinion and
Robert Ward on behalf of the London glass trade,
in which it was stated tbat the petitioners had
already moved for the revocation of the patent,
which related to an invention of which Colnett was
not the inventor. The Attorney General reported
in fftvonr of the petitioners, and stated that " Sir
Kenelm Digby first invented glass bottles nearly
thirty yeara since, and employed Colnett and others
to make them for him." Is anything farther known
as to the nature of the improvement introduced bv
Digby ? Selden, in his ' Table Talk,' refers to the
conBnernent of Digby at Winchester Honse, South-
wark, where, in 1611, Sturtevant asserts that coal
was used successfully in the manufacture of green
glass. I should be glad of any information re-
specting this Southwark glass manufacture. There
is good reason to believe that this new proc«s3
was introduced by Zoucb, Percival, nnd others, and
formed the subject-matter of the patent which led
to the celebrated monopoly of Manael; but it is
far from certain that the glass manufacture did
not exist in this district at an earlier date. A
reference to the parish registers ongbt to determine
the question. E. WTSDDAM HULHE.
" EDUCATIONALIST."—Can any philological or
other reasons b« advanced for the legitimacy or
otherwise of this word ? If I mistake not, it is
invariably used by the Times; but I have come
across a small country newspaper proprietor who
would not have it upon any consideration. Drop-
ping the penult, he always printed " educationist."
On referring to the so-called standard dictionaries,
I find they are simply bewildering. "Webster (ed.
1884) and Worcester (1889) give " educationist "
only. Neither form is given by Latham (1876),
and both words are also absent in the ' Imperial'
(1881). The ' Century' says that " educationalist "
is the same as " educationist," and only appends
the definition with illustrations to the latter. This
order is reverted in the' Encyclopsedio,' while Nuttall
gives the one form " educationalist." I am sorry
I am not at the moment able to refer to Dr.
Murray. The matter may seem somewhat insigni-
ficant ; bat if one form it more correct than the
other, pray which one is it ? A. ISORAJI.
" PHILANTHROPY."—Reference is wanted to the
earliest use of this word in English and the cir-
cumstances which called it forth ; also to its use
in the Greek, with the aense in which it was em-
ployed. J. H.
JOHX VAUOHAJJ. — Wanted the pedigree of
John Vaughan, Governor of Londonderry, whose
daughter and coheir, Sidney, married Sir Frederick
Hamilton, who oh. 1661; her sister coheiress, Bar-
bara, married William Lathom, 6b. 1665. In Sir
William Belturn's MSS. there is the statement
made, and then crossed out, that John Vaughan
married Lady Birbara Sydney,daughter of Robert,
Earl of Leicester. The names of his daughter*,
Barbara and Sidney, would lead one to suppose
there wa3 some connexion between the families of
Vaughan and Sydney. But Sir B. Bnrke, in his
' Extinct Peerages,' says Lady Barbara Sydney
married first, Viscount Strangford, and second,
Sir Thos. Colepepper. A Sir John Yanghan was
M.P. for Donegal 1613 and 1634.
0. R. WoOLWARD.
Toowooniba, Queensland.
PRACTICES OF TEE E. I. COMPANY IN
RELATION- TO ITS CHARTER, 168S-94.—In COn-
nexiontherewith the Dukeof Leeds was impeached,
and Sir Thoj.Cook, Knt., Sir Basil Firebrace, Knt.,
Charles Bates, Eiq , and James Craggs were
committed to the Tower of London in April, 1695
(see 'Journali of the H. of C.,' vol. ii. pp. 327,
320, &c). I am very desirous of knowing (1) on
which days of the month they were received into
the Tower ; (2) in which particular parts of the
Tower they were imprisoned respectively; and (3)in
which year, and on which day of the month they
were discharged respectively from their imprison-
ment. My inquiry relates most particularly to
Sir B. Firebrace. C. MASOK.
29, Emperor'i Gate, 3.W.
PRIESTS' ORDERS.—What is the best way to
find out, since the year A.D. 1830, in England and
Wales (l)how many Roman priests have become
Anglican ; (2) how many Anglican priests have
become Roman ; (3) how many Nonconformist
ministers have become Anglican priests ; (4) how
many Nonconformist ministers have becomeRoman
priests ? Roman priests are not Nonconformists—
for the purpose of this query.
HABRT GKEKKSTED.
SATFORD, OF CANTERBURY. (See 4th S. L 366,
viii. 312, 489.)—I am desirous of obtaining, for
genealogical purposes, information as to the family
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/s8-VIII/187/67/4333276 by Goteborgs Universitet user on 14 December 2019

