174 NOTES AND QUERIES. [No. 147.
The marriage is supposed to have taken place be-
tween the years 1GI8 and 1624; perhaps during
Patrick's confinement as slate prisoner in the
tower, from which he regained his liberty in 1622.
This lady was mother of Lady Van Dyck, who
•was married to the great painter in 1639—40.
Any notice or particulars concerning Lady
Gerrard's second marriage with P. Kuthven will
be most acceptable to Q.
" To be in the wrong f;nx." — What is the origin
of this phrase? It is of old standing. In the
11 Communication in the Tower between Dr. Kid-
ley and Secretary Bourn," Foxe, vol. vi. p. 438.
(edit. 1838), Kidley says:
" Sir. If you will hear how St. Augustine cxpoundeth
that place, you shall perceive that you are in a wrong
box."
W. G.
Sir Kenelm Digby. — When Gothurst, Bucks,
was sold to the descendant of the lord-keeper
"Wright, in 1704, portraits of Sir Kenelm Digby
and his wife Venetia Stanley were, according to
Pennant, left in the mansion. Can any reader of
" N. & Q." inform me where those remarkable
portraits are now ? T. It. POTTBB.
Was Sir Kenelm Digby a Painter?—At the
monastery of Mount St. Bernard, on Charnwood
Forest, is a fine painting of St. Francis, with a label
inscribed " Kenelmus Digba2us pinxit, 1643." Is
there any evidence that tliid celebrated man excelled
in painting as he did in the other arts? T. 11. P.
St. Mary of the Loioes, or De Lacubus.— Can
any of your correspondents furnish me with
Scott's authority for translating " St. Mary of the
Lowes" "St. Mary de Zacubus" ? (Murmion, note
to introduction to second canto.)
Should " Lowes " be proved to signify " Lake,"
then I think we have the etymology of Lowestofr,
" the toft of the lakes," to distinguish it from Toft
Monks, a village a few miles off. Lowesloft adjoins
Lake Lothing, and the sheet of water called Mut-
ford Broad.
Lowestoft is colloquially pronounced Laysfoft.
In Forby's Vocab. of East Anglia, " lay" is ex-
plained " a large pond." The interchange of
" ow" into " ay " frequently takes place : " bow "
window for " bay" window; "mowe " (Percy Re-
liques) for " may," &c. E. G. Pv.
Peleg in German)/.—Can any of your readers
give me information as to a tradition that Pol eg,
the architect of Babel, having lost his speech, fled
from Shinar after the dispersion, and found his
way to some part of Germany, where he erected a
triangular building, in which he dwelt, and which
was discovered i-i the year 553 ? A. F. B.
Diss.
Public Whipping of Women in England. — I
| should like to know to how late a period the public
| whipping of -female offenders was continued in
England. Among some higiily interesting old
newspaper cuttings I lately purchased of Mr. James
Fennell, I find the following on this subject:
" On Wednesday the 14th, a woman (an old offender)
was conveyed in a cart from Clerkenwell Bridewell to
j Enfield, and publickly whipped at the cartViail, by
j the common hangman, for cutting down and destroying
! wood in Enfield Cliace. She is to undergo the same
j discipline twice more."—Public Ledyer, 1764.
j Thank goodness we are not so barbarous at t*ie
i present day as to tolerate the flogging of a woman.
j -at the cart's-tail by the common hangman.
! GEORGE GAVTHOHXE.
High Wycombe.
Henry Mortimer. — Can any of your reader? in-
form me who was Henry Mortimer, who married
Luciii, daughter of Bernabo Visconti, and widow
of Edmund Holland, Earl of Kent? Also, who
was Sir Walter Mortimer, whose heiress, Elinor,
married Thomas Hopton of Shropshire some lime
about 1400 ? Also, where I can find a pedigree of
Sir Giles Daubeny, who by his first wife, Mary
Leeke, left an heiress, Jane, who married Sir
Robert Markham, and seems by his third wife to
have been grandfather to Giles Lord Daubeny ?
E. H. Y.
Passage in Jeremy Taylor.—Can any of your
readers explain the following passage in Jeremy
Taylor's Life of Christ? —
j " I do not say that a sin against human laws is
i greater than a prevarication against a Divine com-
mandment; as the instances may b?, the distance is
next to infinite, and to touch the earth with our fact
within the octaves of Easter, or to taste flesh upon days
of abstinence," &c Buckley's edition, p. 122.
To what custom do the words in Italics allude ?
W. M. X.
Locke on Romanism. —
" Popery is not a religion at all, but a conspiracy"
against the liberties of mankind."
This is attributed to John Locke. In what vo-
lume and page of Locke's works will the above
extract be found ? T. L.
Lancashire Sayings. — I should be glad to learn
the meaning and derivation of the vulgar reply to
a common enough question : " What have you got
there ? " " Layoers (lay-overs f) for meddlers."
There is another tantalising reply to a question,
" Where did you get it?"
" Where Kester (Christopher) bought his coat."
"Where was that?"
" Where it was to be had."
I believe this last to be very ancient, and shall
I be glad to learn if it exists elsewhere than in
J Lancashire. K.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/s1-VI/147/174/4525987 by guest on 25 October 2019

