Though the mystery of Forobosco’s vanishing
has never been satisfactorily explained, it
seems oddly symbolic of the critical erasure
of Catholic or, more accurately, High Church
Anglican elements in the plays of Webster,
whom scholars have been too quick to brand
a ‘hot’ Puritan.
T
ODD A. B ORLIK
Bloomsburg University
doi:10.1093/notesj/gjr033
/C223The Author (2011). Published by Oxford University Press.
All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Advance Access publication 18 April, 2011
SIR KENELM DIGBY’S CONSPICUOUS
REVISIONS OF ‘CONCERNING
SPENCER’
EARLY attacks on Ben Jonson tended to
focus on his lack of originality as an author.
Clergyman and poet Charles Fitzgeoffrey, for
example, paying Jonson a rather backhanded
compliment, accuses the poet ‘of stealing and
of wicked thieving’ and elaborates that ‘These
plays, I say then—plays so wondrous clever, /
Thou stolest basely while the gods were busy, /
And now proceedest as thine own to vend
them’.
1 Such charges help us to make sense
of a preponderance of manuscript corrections
in the holograph copy of Sir Kenelm Digby’s
essay ‘Concerning Spencer’ located in British
Library Additional MS 41,846, fol. 108–11.
2
Specifically, Digby’s multiple revisions of the
sentences focusing on Jonson’s relationship to
his laureate predecessor, Edmund Spenser,
betray Digby’s deep ambivalence in represent-
ing Jonson as beholden to any form of literary
influence. Indeed, these manuscript corrections
consistently draw attention away from
Jonson’s relationship to literary figures of the
past—even figures as venerable as Spenser—
and toward Jonson’s personal achievement as
a poet.
I offer the following transcription of Digby’s
remarks on Jonson’s inheritance of the laure-
ate crown from Spenser complete with blotted
phrases and interlinear additions:
3
<an other a new one rose >
when after that divine Spencers sunne was
no sooner sett, but in Johnson it rose againe
<who being himselfe most >
wth as much glory and brightnesse as ever
any shone withall, who hath long taught the
world, that as there is nothing more excellent
and admirable in iudicious compositions
that on severall kindes he hath made, so
among those that have gone before him
thinketh
<more>
no man more excellent and admirable then
this his late prædecessor in the laurell
crowne.
While minor revisions appear throughout this
manuscript, in this passage Digby displays an
unusually heavy corrective hand indicative of
the potentially sensitive nature of his subject
matter. After all, as Jonson’s friend, patron,
and eventual literary executor, Digby was
deeply concerned with promoting Jonson’s
status as a literary innovator.
The first aggregate of corrections, centred on
the metaphor of ‘divine Spencers sunne’, dis-
plays Digby’s progression from the phrase ‘it
rose againe’ to ‘an other’ and finally to ‘a new
one rose’ in figuring Jonson’s place as
England’s preeminent poet. These revisions
have the strange effect of obfuscating Digby’s
metaphor even as they succeed in registering
Jonson’s autonomy from Spenser. Rather
than settling upon the familiar metaphor of
the rising and setting sun, Digby chooses to
represent Spenser and Jonson as two distinct
suns, the latter succeeding the former in pro-
gression, but each emitting its own source of
poetic energy. Digby’s next revision, which
alters the phrase ‘who hath long taught the
world, that as there is nothing more excellent
and admirable in iudicious compositions’ to
read ‘who being himselfe most excellent and
admirable in iudicious compositions’, focuses
1 Charles Fitzgeoffrey ‘Ad Beniaminum Ionsonium ’, in D.
H. Craig (ed.), Ben Jonson: The Critical Heritage (London,
1990), 86.
2 A transcription of this essay also appears in British
Library MS Harley 4153. For modern print editions see
Eric Bligh Sir Kenelm Digby and His Venetia (London,
1932), 277–80 and R. M. Cummings (ed.), Spenser: The
Critical Heritage (London, 1971), 151–3. 3 British Library Additional MS 41,846, fol. 110r.
292 NOTES AND QUERIES 2011
 at Nanyang Technological University on April 25, 2015http://nq.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
emphasis on Jonson’s laudable status as an
poet instead of on the pedagogical potential
of Jonson’s poetry. Rather than allowing
Jonson the author to disappear into his
poetic creation like so many anonymous wri-
ters, Digby in this revision, foregrounds
Jonson’s position as the creator of admirable
works. Finally, Digby’s elision of the line ‘so
among those that have gone before him’ iso-
lates Jonson’s admiration of Spenser as the
only relevant critical opinion rather than cast-
ing Jonson as part of a larger community of
critics. Like the other revisions, this change
highlights Digby’s effort to represent
Jonson’s personal autonomy as a unique au-
thority in literary matters.
Taken together, these revisions display
Digby’s meticulousness in representing
Jonson’s autonomy from Spenser and other
literary figures of the past. In this way, we
can see Digby, who would go on to edit the
1641 folio of Jonson’s collected works, strug-
gling to represent Jonson as an independent
authority in a culture noted for its adherence
to literary convention.
4 Scholars have long
recognized the extent to which Jonson’s
career represents a watershed in the emergence
of modern conceptions of the individual
author as the proprietor of his or her literary
works.
5 Joseph Loewenstein, for example,
pointing to Jonson’s unprecedented interven-
tion in the printing of his own collected
works, refers to the 1616 folio of The Workes
of Beniamin Jonson as ‘a major event in the
history of what one might call the biblio-
graphic ego’.
6 Given Jonson’s intense interest
in forging his own authorial identity, Digby’s
manuscript corrections provide us with a small
but nonetheless compelling register of one crit-
ic’s attitude toward Jonson as a poet struggling
for self definition. Digby, it seems, recognized
Jonson’s wish to be recognized as a literary
innovator free from contingent forms of cul-
tural authority.
P
ETER REMIEN
University of Colorado, Boulder
doi:10.1093/notesj/gjr063
/C223The Author (2011). Published by Oxford University Press.
All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Advance Access publication 15 April, 2011
THREE INTERPRETATIONS OF THE
LESBIAN RULE IN EARLY
MODERN EUROPE
IN Adagia, Erasmus included an image that
came to be widely used in the debates of the
Reformation, that of the flexible Lesbian rule.
It has not previously been noticed that the
phrase appears in three distinct senses in the
early modern period, partly following lines of
profession and religion.
In the Nichomachean Ethics , Aristotle uses
the image to discuss equity in law. He asserts
that since the law is sometimes insufficient to
secure justice, flexibility is required, ‘for when
the thing is indefinite, like the leaden rule used
in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule
adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is
not rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to
the facts’.
1
Aristotle, then, uses the image positively.
This original sense appears in some legal
texts and in contexts of discussing law.
Arnold Vinnen (Vinnius) used the term in
this sense in 1624.
2 Giambattista Vico remem-
bers this sense in his Art of Rhetoric of 1711–
41: ‘It is much better that laws be flexible.
Thus, the law may be used like the leaden
rule of Lesbos ( regula Lesbia ) which
molds itself to the whole and not the whole
to itself’.
3
4 See Thomas M. Greene The Light of Troy: Imitation and
Discovery in Renaissance Poetry (New Haven, 1982).
5 See Joseph Loewenstein Ben Jonson and Possessive
Authorship (Cambridge, 2002); Arthur Marotti Manuscript,
Print, and the English Renaissance Lyric (Ithaca, 1995), and
Richard Helgerson Self-Crowned Laureates: Spenser,
Jonson, Milton, and the Literary System . (Berkley, 1983).
6 Joseph Loewenstein ‘The Script in the Marketplace,’
Representations, xii (1985), 101.
1 Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics , trans. David Ross
(Oxford, 1980), X, 1137b; 133.
2 Arnold Vinnen, In quatuor libros Institutionum imperia-
lium commentarius academicus & forensis (Amsterdam,
1665), bk. I, ch. 2. Cited in Giambattista Vico, Universal
Right, trans. Giorgio Pinton and Margaret Diehl
(Amsterdam, 2000), 283.
3 Giambattista Vico, The Art of Rhetoric (Institutiones
oratoriae 1711–1741), trans. Giuliano Crifo (Amsterdam,
1996), 61.
2011 NOTES AND QUERIES 293
 at Nanyang Technological University on April 25, 2015http://nq.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
