The Fleire, perhaps especially the altered Fleire
recorded in the British Library copy. While the
connections are neat, the question remains of
at what level of specificity one should interpret
them. At one extreme, it could be argued that
the British Library text, seemingly adapted for
some sort of cut-down theatrical performance
with a smaller cast and a shorter duration,
might be the very one recorded by Jordan. At
the other extreme, one could argue that the
connections show that there was a widespread
meme or theatergram of which Sharpham’s
play and ‘The Florentine Ladies’ were two un-
connected examples: the idea of Florentine
gentlewomen also being prostitutes. I would
propose a middle path between these two al-
ternatives. The use of The Fleire by Robert
Chamberlain, the allusion to it by Thomas
Jordan, the annotated quarto, and Jordan’s
‘Florentine Ladies’ prologue all speak to the
narrative that Sharpham’s comedy was a suc-
cess which lived long, in various forms, after its
initial performance and printing. Given the
dearth of information any progress is worth
having, and we may conclude that at some
point in his career Thomas Jordan wrote a
Prologue and Epilogue for a play which
sounds like an adaptation of Sharpham’s The
Fleire.
M
ATTHEW STEGGLE
Sheffield Hallam University
doi:10.1093/notesj/gjx096
/C223The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press.
All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
‘THE THRID W CH DOTH MY PAINEFULL
LIFE SUSTAINE’: A NEW POEM BY
KENELM DIGBY
IN 1877, Henry Bright published a collection
of fifteen Poems from Sir Kenelm Digby’s
Papers that had been passed from the family
of the famous seventeenth-century courtier,
philosopher, and pirate, Kenelm Digby, to
his own.
1 In addition to pieces by Ben
Jonson, George Villiers, and perhaps Walter
Raleigh, Digby composed five of the poems
in the collection. While realizing that he held
some remarkable material, Bright lamented in
the introduction to his edition that ‘Some
papers are missing from the packet. They
were given away as autographs, and cannot
be recovered’.
2 I have recently discovered
what is almost certainly one of these papers.
Like the others in Bright’s collection, it is on
two loose pieces of faded paper and is in Digby’s
elegant, swooping hand,autographed ‘KD’. This
poem has travelled from England to America,
and is now housed at the Folger Shakespeare
Library in Washington, DC.
3 It is an original,
has not been hitherto printed, and, to my know-
ledge, there is no other copy. I include a tran-
scription of the poem in its entirety here:
[1r]
The thrid w ch doth my painefull life sustaine
is growne so feeble that I feare
it soone will breake, and death growes neere.
For since that lukelesse hower w ch did part
my wretched soule from her, I find
that griefe hath quite oregrowne my mind,
and strucke this doubt unto my hart
that I nere more those favors shall obtaine
w
ch once I had; nor see her face againe.
Time flyes away, and howers runne so fast
that I have hardely space to weigh
my miserie; but as to day
the rose is blowne and sweetly spreds her leaves,
when the next sunne comes to his height
above our heads, it withers streight,
and litle signe behind it leaves
of what it was; Just so do I make hast
unto my end now that my joys are past.
[2v]
All places now alike disturbe my rest
and hidious seeme, because those eyes
I can not see on whom relyes
my earthly happinesse and all my joye.
My thoughtes, whither I sleepe or wake
are fixt on her; yet can I take
no comfort in this deepe annoye:
Butt by my present state w
th woe opprest
I learne to know how much I once was blest.
Alas! if by discourse I might give ease
unto those flames of strong desire
wch burne in me like raging fire,
then my complaints and sighes might coole my hart:
But sure t’were better to refraine
all such expressions made in vaine
1 The collection is now at the British Library: Add. MS
89136.
2 Henry Bright, Poems from Sir Kenelm Digby’s Papers:
In the Possession of Henry A. Bright (London, 1877), i.
3 Folger, v.b.393, 11r-2r. The transcription that follows
is faithful, with the exception of normalizing i/j and u/v
spellings.
406 NOTES AND QUERIES September 2017
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/64/3/406/4049616
by University of Cambridge user
on 27 May 2018
and stupide grow in feeling smart.
Thin, must I suffir shippwracke in these seas
of woe, for here, naught can my griefes appease.
[2r]
What shall I doe? those tresses of her haire,
wch might stirre enive in the sunne,
and eyes that ere the day were done
would cloude his beames and overshine his light,
are gone, and left me here alone
in miserie to make my mone
unto the starres; and in this night
of her sadde absince, sigh, weepe, and despaire
of ever seeing woman halfe so faire.
Goe litle paper, if thou dost arrive
unto that Paradise most sweete
where shee abides, and that her gratious hande
shee do stretch forth; beware, touch not, but stande
aloofe, then falling att her feete
till her, If ten dayes hence I be alive
I’le see her in my wonted forme; if dead,
my Ghost shall evr’ie night waite by her bed.
KD
As is the case with most of those in Bright’s
collection, the poem was evidently written
soon after the death of his wife, Venetia
Digby, in 1633. While there has now been a
good deal written on Digby’s semi-autobio-
graphical Loose Fantasies —which he penned
in 1628—this poem supplies a unique insight
into Digby’s literary construction of his life
and his relationship with Venetia during a
slightly later period.
4
The poem itself is carefully composed of five
nine-line (and one eight-line) stanzas, despite
Digby’s claims that it was written in a fit of
passion: ‘that griefe hath quite oregrowne my
mind’. Insofar as Digby was an active reader
of Edmund Spenser—writing a Discourse
concerning Edmund Spenser and publishing
Observations on the 22 stanze in the 9
th canto
of the 2d book of Spencers Faery queen in
1643—his use of nine-line stanzas was almost
certainly self-conscious. 5 Yet, since his lyric
poem is bereft of epic pretensions, he deviates
from the Spenserian stanza by using the more
simplistic rhyme scheme of abbcddeaa. The
opening line of Digby’s poem—‘The thrid w ch
doth my painefull life sustaine’—also plays
with the theme of concatenation that Spenser
derived from ancient mythology and dwelt on
at length.
6 Along with indicating the thin line
that separates this life from the hereafter, his
‘thrid’ resounds with the Platonic thread of
fates that is shaped in Book 1 of The Faerie
Queene as the ‘chayne of strong necessittee’.
7
Given Venetia’s untimely death at the height of
her beauty, in this poem Digby is compelled to
view all things as fixed by fate, ‘unto the
starres’.
Digby also famously spent the three years
following Venetia’s death in Gresham
College, dressed in the threadbare garb of a
monk as he conducted chymical experiments.
8
In all probability, it was at this time that he
composed his epitaphs. His chymical concerns
are evident in the way that Digby shapes his
body as a still, with the writing of verse acting
as an outlet to air his enflamed soul: ‘Alas! if
by discourse I might give ease / unto those
flames of strong desire / w
ch burne in me like
raging fire, / then my complaints and sighes
might coole my hart’. In this way, he squares
classical catharsis (as a means of purging cor-
rupted humours) with a chymical orientation.
He captures the phenomena of burning and
placation by carefully indenting lines two and
three and five to seven in each stanza (other
than the last) as he shifts from pentameter to
tetrameter. This process is most palpable in the
second stanza, where he writes: ‘Time flyes
away, and howers runne so fast / that I have
hardely space to weigh / my miserie; but as to
4 On Digby’s Loose Fantasies , see Vittorio Gabrieli,
Loose Fantasies (Rome, 1968), ix–xxxvii; Jackson I. Cope,
‘Sir Kenelm Digby’s Rewritings of his Life’, in D. Hirst and
R. Strier (eds), Writing and Political Engagement in
Seventeenth-Century England (Cambridge, 1999), 52–68;
Roger Sharrock, ‘Modes of Self-Representation: Herbert
of Cherbury, Kenelm Digby, Samuel Pepys’, The
Seventeenth Century , iii (1988), 1–16; and Joe Moshenska,
‘Sir Kenelm Digby’s Interruptions: Piracy and Lived
Romance in the 1620s’, Studies in Philology, cxii (2016),
424–83.
5 See Kenelm Digby, BL, Add. MS 41846, 108r–11r and
Observations on the 22 stanze in the 9 th canto of the 2d book of
Spencers Faery queen (London, 1644), which first circulated
in manuscripts such as BL MS Add., 4484, 235–43. On
Digby and The Faerie Queene , see Alastair Fowler,
Spenser and the Numbers of Time (London, 1964) 260–88
and Joe Moshenska, ‘ ‘‘Spencerus isthic conditur’’: Kenelm
Digby’s Transcription of William Alabaster’, Spenser
Studies, xxvii (2012), 315–24.
6 See Jessica Wolfe, Homer and the Question of Strife
from Erasmus to Hobbes (Toronto, 2015), 176–207.
7 Edmund Spenser, The Faerie Queen: The Shepheards
Calendar (London, 1617), 1.5.25.5–6.
8 See John Aubrey, Brief Lives , vol. 1, ed. by A. Clark
(Suffolk, 2004), 226–7.
September 2017 NOTES AND QUERIES 407
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/64/3/406/4049616
by University of Cambridge user
on 27 May 2018
day / the rose is blowne and sweetly spreds her
leaves’. Physiological reactions are here inex-
tricable from his psychological states as he
moves from the memory of his love, to the
realisation of her absence, before anticipating
their reunion in the afterlife. By contracting his
lines, Digby is forced to use enjambment to
replicate his longing, as the reader waits to
catch his train of thought. Both in its content
and shifting metre, the poem is similar to
‘Number IV’ in Bright’s collection, which
starts: ‘Buri’d in the shades of horrid night /
my vexed soule doth groane, exil’d from
light’.
9 The poem in the Folger is, however,
more rhythmic and controlled. In this sense,
it is one of the more skilful scraps of verse
that Digby left behind.
Joe Moshenska has recently presented a
thorough account of Digby’s voyages in the
period preceding Venetia’s death, and the
topic of travel is another bridge that spans
the ebb and flow of his verse and its biblio-
graphical themes.
10 For all his success as a
pirate, Digby re-works the commonplace
image of drowning in tears to admit that he
must now ‘suffir shippwracke in these seas /
of woe, for here, naught can my griefes ap-
pease’. The final stanza also retroactively
frames the epitaph as a wayfaring message, to
which he gives the command: ‘Goe litle paper’.
These lines resound with Chaucer’s ‘Go litel
bok’ at the end of Troilus and Criseyde , pos-
sibly refracted through Spenser’s prefatory
poem to The Shepherdes Calender in which he
sends his piece to a pastoral paradise: ‘Goe
little booke: thy selfe presente / As child
whose parent is unkent’.
11 With regards to
his poem’s setting sail, it is perhaps significant
that, in a famous episode, Digby sought to
elude the advances of the Queen Regent of
France, Maria de’Medici, by feigning his
death. His letters beseeching Venetia to disre-
gard the rumours of his fatality failed to reach
her—probably being intercepted by his disap-
proving mother—and she thus became
engaged to Richard, Third Earl of Dorset.
Based on these considerations, Digby expresses
a dual anxiety in the final stanza: first that the
message of his continued love would not
arrive, and, second, if it did reach her, that it
would inadequately convey his steadfast devo-
tion from afar.
In expressing his adoration, Digby further
transposes numerous biographical moments—
some of which he relayed in Loose Fantasies —
into standard romantic tropes. While his letters
did not reach Venetia, word of her suitors
returned to him. When it did, Digby appar-
ently threw a tress of Venetia’s hair that he
wore as a bracelet into the fire.
12 In his
poem, this incident is transposed into the rhet-
orical question: ‘What shall I doe? those tresses
of her haire, / w
ch might stirre enive in the
sunne’. Rather than representing his instinctive
desire to burn her lock in a fit of jealousy,
Digby expresses the stock, blason conceit that
her hair could even kindle envy in the sun.
With his idealization of some supposedly
biographical events, Digby plays on the
Platonic theme that the beloved should
propel the soul towards the form of Love and
ultimately God. Yet Venetia’s early death led
Digby to shape the process of the soul’s hypos-
tasis in far more literal terms. Whereas Digby’s
Loose Fantasies repeatedly expresses a yearn-
ing to return to Venetia and dispel all rumours
regarding his apparent death, his poem con-
versely explores the possibility of taking the
much further and more permanent journey to
paradise. As the caesura in the penultimate line
indicates, Digby oscillates between being mor-
ally elevated by Venetia’s ‘wonted form’ and
the simple desire to be ‘dead’. This duality
plays out in the tension between his poem’s
well-wrought form and its impassioned subject
matter.
J
USTIN BEGLEY
University College, Oxford
doi:10.1093/notesj/gjx070
/C223The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press.
All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Advance Access publication 27 July, 2017
9 Bright, Poems from Sir Kenelm Digby’s Papers ,7 .
10 See Joe Moshenska, A Stain in the Blood: The
Remarkable Voyage of Sir Kenelm Digby, Pirate and Poet,
Courtier and Cook, King’s Servant and Traitor’s Son
(London, 2016).
11 The Faerie Queen: The Shepheards Calendar , A2r. 12 Loose Fantasies , 67.
408 NOTES AND QUERIES September 2017
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nq/article-abstract/64/3/406/4049616
by University of Cambridge user
on 27 May 2018
