University of Northern Iowa
An Introduction to the History of the Law of Real Property by Kenelm Edward Digby
Review by: H. C. L.
The North American Review, Vol. 121, No. 249 (Oct., 1875), pp. 429-433
Published by: University of Northern Iowa
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25109948 .
Accessed: 17/05/2014 07:36
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
University of Northern Iowa is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The North
American Review.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 194.29.185.149 on Sat, 17 May 2014 07:36:00 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
1875,] Digby9s History of the Law of Heal Property. 429 
Finally, if it is necessary to sum up the result of the impressions 
produced by Mr. Tennyson's drama, it must be conceded that " 
Queen 
Mary 
" contains nothing which will change the opinion of those who 
had already made up their minds that Mr. Tennyson was a master 
of form, but not of thought, that he could express, but not invent. 
On the other hand, it cannot be denied that as a study of life, 
" 
Queen 
Mary 
" 
is not only an advance, but a considerable advance, upon any 
thing the poet has yet done. He is not losing, but gaining, ground. 
He has descended into the arena and fought for the prize without 
the assistance of his own natural weapons, and he has at once, if not 
achieved a great victory, at least escaped defeat. In spite of its 
defects, " Queen Mary 
" is a higher type of work than anything Mr. 
Tennyson had done before. No doubt there are natural limits to 
the poet's power of self-development, but he seems not yet to have 
reached them. If he writes a drama of Queen Elizabeth, it will 
probably be better than " 
Queen Mary "; and, questionable as the suc 
cess of " Queen Mary 
" 
is, there is still enough in it that is excellent 
to make the world ask for more. 
3. ? An Introduction to the History of the Law of Real Property. By 
Kenelm Edward Digby. Macmillan & Co. Oxford. 1875. 
This is a very admirable little book. The utter lack of all educa 
tional law-books induced Mr. Digby to write this Introduction, ar 
ranged for the use of students, many of whom may not become 
lawyers, and possessing, therefore, a double interest, educational and 
historic. It not only presents the author's views on certain ob 
scure portions of the law, but develops his method of instruction. 
As is truly said in the Preface, the difficulty in instructing univer 
sity students in law is to draw the line between principle and detail. 
Of late years an effort has been made in English universities and 
American law-schools to teach law historically and scientifically as 
well as practically. Too much cannot be said in support of the theory 
which produces such efforts. Efforts such as these alone distinguish 
the school from the office, and give to its instruction an independent 
and real value. To teach law as was and is unfortunately still done 
in many cases by the simple formula, 
" This is the law to-day, make 
the most of it," is sheer waste of time. This method is fast being 
abandoned, and the proper theory is now, in some cases, in danger of 
being wrecked by bad practice. The line between principle and de 
tail is hard to draw, and we therefore cordially recommend Mr. Digby's 
This content downloaded from 194.29.185.149 on Sat, 17 May 2014 07:36:00 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
430 Digby98 History of the Law of Heal Property. [Oct. 
book to American law professors for suggestions of method. As the 
author says very modestly, he* has only 
" sketched " the history of the 
law. This is precisely the right thing to do. Begin as he does 
at the beginning and .sketch freely the main principles on which the 
fabric of modern law is built, then, having developed the causes up 
to a certain point, throw all the weight of instruction on the effects, 
the law of to-day. One danger to the new theory is that its adherents 
sometimes forget that the primary object of a law-school is to turn 
out practical lawyers. The historic part of the instruction, although 
the distinguishing mark of schools, is purely secondary, and must be 
carefully subordinated to the business of making lawyers. It is an 
all-important and essential adjunct, but is in its nature subsidiary. 
Another danger is the useless elaboration of details, 
? the giving twelve 
examples of a principle where one would do, simply because they are 
ancient. This is mere antiquarianism of the worst kind, and absolutely 
injurious. The greatest danger of all arises from a combination of 
this love of antiquarian detail with a partiality for some one period 
particularly rich in legal curiosities. Such a period generally must 
form one link in the chain of development, but the evil is in choosing 
it for instruction to the exclusion of all that goes before and comes 
after. It may be a period when the law has an interest only from 
its iniquitous technicality, when the old system is utterly corrupted 
and the reform not yet begun. Instruction in such a period obscures 
principles by procedure, disgusts the student, and causes in his mind 
the confusion of the good theory and the vicious method, and the con 
sequent ruin of both; a great injury to the cause of sound education. 
The most interesting portion of Mr. Digby's work as a contribution 
to the history of law, is the first chapter. Anglo-Saxon law has been 
almost entirely neglected in all elementary treatises, Glanvil being 
generally taken as the starting-point, vague references to every 
thing anterior being considered sufficient. In reality Glanvil repre 
sents an advanced period of legal development. It is also not unusual 
in text-books to represent feudalism as the only source of English law 
until the advent of Bracton and Roman influence. Many authors 
leave the idea on the student's mind that feudalism sprang armed from 
the heads of the Normans, and was by them brought to England. 
The germs of this system, which was the growth of centuries, had been 
brought in by the Teutonic invasion. When the seed fell on good 
ground, as in France, it ripened very fast; when on stony ground, as 
in England, the growth was slower, but the same result was at hand. 
William the Conqueror superimposed a fully developed system on a 
half-developed one of the same stock. It is this development before 
This content downloaded from 194.29.185.149 on Sat, 17 May 2014 07:36:00 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
