Chesterton and 
Kenelm Henry Digby 
Kevin L. Morris 
KEVIN L. MORRIS. B.A., PH.D., lives at 35 Rivington Road, Hale, 
Altrincham, Cheshire, England. Mr. Morris is a member of the British 
Branch of the Chesterton Society. 
In G.K.'s Weekly of 14 May 1927, there appeared an essay by 
Chesterton called "A Grammar of Knighthood,"' concerning a 
nineteenth-century Catholic writer called Kenelm Henry Digby 
(1796-1880); it is an essay which displays another strand in the net­
work of mediaevalist influences upon him. They were certainly 
kindred souls; but what, precisely, in the light of this essay, did they 
have in common? 
Digby, the son of a Church of Ireland minister, was drawn to 
Catholicism by reading Sir Walter Scott, Catholic polemics and 
mediaeval writings and by visiting Catholic France. In 1822 was 
published the first edition of The Broad Stone of Honour^ (sub­
titled Rules for the Gentlemen of England),^ a romantic, reverent, 
mythologised account of mediaeval chivalry, emphasising its Chris­
tian aspect, and depicting it, along with the Church, as the great 
pillar of society. It influenced several important Victorian mediaeval-
ists, amongst them A.W.N. Pugin and John Ruskin. In 1825, Digby 
became a Catholic, and revised the work to bring it firmly into line 
with Catholicism. In 1831 he began to publish an enormous reli­
gious mediaevalist work called Mores Catholici: or, Ages of Faith,^ 
which glorified the Catholic Church as the chief strength and inspi­
ration of mediaeval society, while criticising the modern age. 
The Broad Stone, on which Chesterton comments, promulgated 
a view of mediaeval chivalry—in fact of the aristocracy—as consist­
ing of "Christian gentlemen . . . patrons of the Church, the defend-
332 
Chesterton and Kenelm Henry Digby 
ers of the poor," and by aristocracy or gentlemen he did not really 
connote a rich, landed, feudal class, but rather a brotherhood 
"united upon the common ground of the faith, loyaky, and 
honour"; inherent in which qualities were "duties"; obligations to 
the rest of society, particularly to the poor.^ The search for such a 
brotherhood should, nevertheless, begin at the natural place, which 
was the old aristocracy. Chivalry, in other words, was a "lay aposto-
late" designed for service. It is clear from this that Chesterton was 
right in this essay to challenge Lord Macaulay's adverse judgment of 
Digby, that he thought "God made the world for the use of gentle­
men."^ His central social concern was not for the rich but for the 
poor. 
Chesterton was also right to oppose Digby and Macaulay, since 
they represent opposke poles of nineteenth-century romantic histori­
ography: Digby, like Chesterton, a thoroughgoing mediaevalist, 
looking to mediaeval Catholicism for examples of all manner of 
goodness, and comparing the past very favourably to the present 
(twenty years before Thomas Carlyle's Past and Present)', Macaulay 
a Whig, anti-Catholic progressivist, believing the Middle Ages to 
have been as dark as Gibbon had painted them, that "the natural 
tendency of society [is] to improvement,"^ and that his own was 
"the most enlightened generation of the most enlightened people 
that ever existed."^ For Chesterton, this complacency, so typical of 
the Brkish establishment, was total humbug, and thus his essay sug­
gests that Macaulay's historical vision was superficial, even that he 
was a "bounder," and that he misunderstood history, just as he 
misunderstood Digby. Chesterton undermines Macaulay's poskion 
by showing that he had not read the book which he condemns, just 
as, though he had sneered at Spenser, he had not read him either.^ 
Chesterton and Digby shared the supra-national perspective of 
Catholicism, which enabled them to see through his brand of estab-
hshment complacency. Again, both were deeply opposed to Utilitar­
ianism, which walked hand in hand with Macaulay's type of 
Whiggery. Chesterton notes that the mediaevalists, Carlyle and 
Ruskin, were at war wkh Utilitarianism,'^ while Macaulay substan­
tially accepted the conclusions of Bentham, the father of Utilitarian­
ism.'' He supposed that Macaulay was typical of the early-Victorian 
realignment of the aristocracy with the middle class, which Chester­
ton saw as compromise standing in the way of true democracy.'^ 
333 
The Chesterton Review 
Thus, though he was on Digby's side vis-a-vis the battle between 
traditionalists and Whigs, he did not share his hopes for a revivified 
aristocracy. 
This Macaulayan compromise was very much against the spirit 
of the radical democrat and mediaevalist, William Cobbett, on 
whom Chesterton wrote a monograph. Cobbett was more his brand 
of mediaevalist, for he had none of Digby's youthful wistfulness 
about the aristocracy. Chesterton's William Cobbett (1925) furthers 
the cause of Distributism, in contrast to Digby, who had no 
detailed political platform. (Distributism had more to do with the 
mediaevalism of Ruskin and William Morris.'^) The book moulds 
Cobbett to Chesterton's form, very much as Digby had moulded the 
Middle Ages to his ideal: both were romantic historians, who made 
a myth of history, and in both cases their doing so was forgivable, 
since they were battling against the established Whig historiographi-
cal tradition. Their historiographical approach was similar in 
another way: Chesterton's essays, "History versus the Historians"''' 
and "Robert Bruce and his Age,"'^ suggest that consultation of 
mediaeval documents is important for a true understanding of the 
Middle Ages, and in this respect Digby was surely to his taste, for 
he presented the period largely through mediaeval quotations. 
Chesterton rightly mentions Digby in the same breath as Cob­
bett, Carlyle and Ruskin,'^ for all were totally opposed to the 
dehumanising effects of industrialism and capitalism, capitalist, 
bourgeois democracy; all found something of value in the Catholic 
Middle Ages; and Digby, Carlyle and Ruskin looked for heroes 
who might guide society, just as Chesterton found such a hero in 
the Catholic Church. (The mention of Dickens, perhaps, spoils the 
set because, although he was like the rest, greatly sympathetic to the 
poor, he was, with Macaulay, strongly anti-mediaevalist.'^) 
The two leading Catholic Victorian mediaevalists were Digby 
and Pugin. Pugin, however, was strictly a revivaUst, which is to say 
that he wanted to resurrect the entire form and substance of 
mediaeval Catholicism; whereas Digby essentially wanted to renew 
the vivacity, the spirit, of mediaeval Catholicism, not necessarily its 
forms. Pugin would tolerate only Gothic as Christian architecture, 
whereas Digby willingly admired Catholic Baroque. Chesterton, too, 
was more interested, as a mediaevalist, in reviving the spirit of 
mediaeval Catholicism rather than its forms; and hence one might 
334 
