408 LETTERS FROM THE DREER COLLECTION July
thecarius qui te de rerum Gallicamm Scriptoribus in Regia Bibliotheca
optirne docebit, dignus quern in tuorurn numero habeas. Scio eum et
usui et voluptati futurum.
XIV. The Earl of Middlesex to Sir Robert Pye
Chelsea, 16 November 1623.
Lionel Cranfield (1575-1645), created Baron Cranfield in 1621 and earl of Middlesex
1622, was at this time lord treasurer. There are allusions to the pension of Sir William
St. Ravie [sic] in the Calendar of Stale Papers, Domestic 8eries, James L, 1623-6,
pp. 97 f., hut this document is not noticed there. Holograph.
His Majesty hath granted to Sir William St. Raby, a knight of Fraunce,
a pension of two hundred pounds per annum during his life and hath
appointed that both letters patents thereof themselfe and the hundred
pounds due thereupon for the first half year ended at Michaelmas last
shall be delivered to St. Raby together as a present from his Majesty
without any fees or charge unto him. I pray you therefore take order that
so much money may be brought to me at Whitehall two months after-
ward at 2 o' the clock, against which time the letters patents are appointed
to be there also, that both may be ready to be delivered according to his
Majesty's express commandment. Whereof praying you to take special
care, I byd you right hartily farewell. From Chelsea the xvith November
1623.
Your very loving friend
MIDDLESEX.
XV. Sir Kenelm Digby to the Earl of Leicester
London, 11 May 1637.
Robert Sidney, earl of Leicester (1505-1677). Holograph.
My good Lorde:
Although the small importance that the payment of my respects to
yr lordship carryeth with it, might seem to argue me of presumption that
I troble you with my triuiall lines, yet my obligations to yr lordship
are so great that I must lay my modesty aside, to give you account of my
safe arrival in this court; where my cbiefe entertainment is to satisfy
concerning you the friendly curiosity of those that love and honor you
(wh[ich] is all those I meet with) and upon so faire occasions to preach
your worth and my oune obligations to you. Be pleased (my noble lord)
to continue yr favors to me by affording me some meanes to wittnesse my
selfe what I have ever vowed to be
Yr Lordships most humble servant
KENBLMK DIGBY.
London, 11 May 1637.
XVI. Charles I to the Prince of Orange
Whitehall, 26 February 1640/1.
Holograph.
A mon Cousin le Prince d'Orange.
Mon Cousin, Je prends I'oportunit6 par le retour de cest Gentil-
homine de vous faire souvenir du prier que je vous ay faist, pour la permis-
 at RMIT University Library on July 3, 2015http://ehr.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
