This article was downloaded by: [Nanyang Technological University]
On: 27 April 2015, At: 12:18
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH,
UK
The Seventeenth Century
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rsev20
MODES OF SELF-
REPRESENTATION HERBERT
OF CHERBURY, KENELM DIGBY,
PEPYS
ROGER SHARROCK a
a London
Published online: 02 Jan 2013.
To cite this article: ROGER SHARROCK (1988) MODES OF SELF-REPRESENTATION
HERBERT OF CHERBURY , KENELM DIGBY , PEPYS, The Seventeenth Century, 3:1, 1-16
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268117X.1988.10555272
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the
information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform.
However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness,
or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views
expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the
Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with
primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any
losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages,
and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the
Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes.
Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan,
sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is
expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 12:18 27 April 2015 

MODES OF SELF-REPRESENTATION: 
HERBERT OF CHERBURY, 
KENELM DIGBY, PEPYS 
Seventeenth-century autobiography exhibits a variety of manner 
from the aristocratic formality of Lord Herbert of Cherbury to the 
headlong raptures of the enthusiastic religious sectaries like Abiezer 
Coppe and Anna Trapnel; it reflects the wide social and individual 
range of the personalities who reveal themselves. Critics of the 
mode, and there are not in England a great many, have usually 
divided their subject-matter into religious and secular. However it 
might be possible to attempt a division more in accordance with the 
form and pressure of self-revelation: into those narratives where the 
author is content to present himself within the bounds of his social 
role and those in which the representation of the self. is more 
intimate and primary - what we might term free-standing auto­
biography. This would enable us to place Herbert with Baxter in the 
first category and Bunyan with Pepys in the second; the associations 
may at first seem bizarre, but that is only because we are used to 
classifying the material according to subject-matter and not accord­
ing to form. After all, we would not press a parallel between 
Deloney's Jack of Newbury and Bunyan's The Lift and Death of Mr. 
Badman too far on the ground that both books are about middle-class 
tradesmen. If autobiography is to be recognized as a literary form in 
its own right it is fitting that prime consideration should be given to 
the linguistic constituents of the form. Bunyan's scriptural quota­
tions and adaptations which echo inside his head ('Thou art my love, 
thou art ·my love') and Pepys' strange macaronic accounts of various 
amorous episodes ('ella tocar mi cosa') are both forms of intimate 
revelation of the desiring self in its search for meaning in the world. 
The question of the literary status of autobiography takes on a 
special interest in the contemporary situation when so many critics, 
whether semioticians, deconstructionists, or reader-response 
theorists, maintain the independence of the text from its ostensible 
author, or regard the text as a meeting-point for reader, author and 
society. If we are too sophisticated any longer to treat a good book as 
the life blood of a master spirit, what do we do about works which are 
in a special and direct sense attempts by the embodied spirit to trace 
the workings of the ghost in the machine? The question may be 
answered, or side-stepped, by a view of autobiography which sees its 
narratives as a series of disguises assumed by the neurotic 
personality. The evasions and justifications of Rousseau or Boswell 
Downloaded by [Nanyang Technological University] at 12:18 27 April 2015 

