  Edinburgh University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Scottish Historical 
Review.
http://www.jstor.org
Review 
Author(s): G. S. Gordon 
Review by: G. S. Gordon 
Source:   The Scottish Historical Review, Vol. 5, No. 19 (Apr., 1908), pp. 357-359
Published by:  Edinburgh University Press
Stable URL:  http://www.jstor.org/stable/25517989
Accessed: 18-12-2015 14:25 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 14:25:22 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Brown: Studies in the History of Venice 357 
Studies. The Studies may be divided into two classes, those which deal 
with the relations between the Republic and individuals, and those which 
deal with general questions of policy. The first are usually excellent, 
notably the exhaustive study of the career of Carmagnola and the 
account of the relations between the Republic and Cararresi. The 
Republic set no limitations to herself in dealing with her mercenaries; 
she hired them, watched them, paid them, cajoled them, and strangled 
them. There was no discharge in that war between the terrible im 
personality of the Venetian policy and the instruments which were 
used for its ends. To the same class belong the carefully articulated 
analysis of the Spanish Conspiracy of 1618 and the valuable account 
of the Venetian State Archives. The subjects of these Studies give 
full scope to their author's skill as an accomplished student of Venetian 
records; but when the reader turns to those Studies which deal with 
wider questions, he is somewhat disappointed. The want of grasp 
which one feels in some of the latter is probably due to the combina 
tion in a compressed form of special and valuable information from 
Venetian Archives and somewhat banal views on general questions. 
This defect may be attributed in part to the limited point of view of 
the Venetian Republic, to which reference has been already made. The 
historian is unconsciously influenced by his material, and long years of 
work in Venetian Archives have probably inoculated the author with 
the perfunctory attitude towards deeper and wider investigation which 
characterized the Venetian rule even when, as in the case of her com 
mercial policy, her vital interests were at stake. A limitation of range 
almost invariably implies a corresponding limitation of depth, but with 
this reservation all the Studies merit careful perusal. 
Mr. Brown has the art of happy characterization and is the master 
of an easy narrative style. An instance of the former is to be found 
in the portraits of Contarini, Sadoleto, and Reginald Pole, in the study which bears the name of the first. Again, the following description of 
Paolo Sarpi's style could not be bettered, 'It is a masculine, athletic 
style; a style of bronze, polished and spare. ... His manner was 
precise, parsimonious, hard, positive, pungent.' Students have been too 
long satisfied to read Sarpi in Le Courayer's translation for the sake of 
the notes, and Mr. Brown's essay will not have been written in vain 
if it sends them back to the exhilarating Italian of the witty friar. 
David Baird Smith. 
Marshal Turenne. By the author of ' A Life of Sir Kenelm Digby,' etc. With an Introduction by Brigadier-General Lloyd, C.B., D.S.O. 
Pp. xxiii, 401. Demy 8vo. London : Longmans, Green & Co. 1907. 
12s. 6d. nett. 
This is a very agreeable and entertaining book. It is no easy matter 
to write lucidly on strategy for the ordinary reader. Perhaps the author 
has succeeded so well because he is, as he tells us, himself an amateur 
in these affairs. He is quite free from the bad ambition to tell too 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 14:25:22 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
358 Marshal Turenne 
much, and he has taken the trouble to procure excellent plans. The 
map at the end is not so good. It is overcrowded with unnecessary 
names; and places so important on one occasion as Rain and Lauingen 
are not marked. He was wise in quoting so freely from Napoleon's 
criticisms : they greatly increase the value of the book. Napoleon 
thought Turenne the greatest of all modern generals before his 
time, and studied his campaigns minutely; for he recognised in his 
strategical marches a new development in the art of war, and he was 
well aware that since strategy is the permanent element of that 
art, its lessons can never be out-of-date. This is insisted on in 
the excellent Introduction by General Lloyd. One of the most in 
teresting chapters in the book is that which deals with the methods 
and implements of war in the seventeenth century. Among much 
that is good there are, however, some inaccuracies. The author has 
confused the ' Swedish feathers' first used by the Swedes under Gustavus 
Adolphus with the forked gun-rests introduced about a century before ; 
and this is the more surprising since he goes on immediately after to 
describe the real ' Swedish feathers.' ' 
Hargobusier,' too, on the same 
page (41) and elsewhere, is almost the only form the word does not take. 
It would, of course, be impossible to write a life of Turenne without 
saying a great deal about the complicated politics and intrigues which 
occupied so many of the distinguished personages of the time. This is 
well done, and makes very interesting reading. But there are con 
siderable defects to be noticed. It is scarcely fair to quote largely 
throughout from De Retz on the most important matters, and then 
inform the reader somewhere well on in the book (p. 154)?what is 
very far from true?that of course De Retz is only a gossip, and is 
not to be regarded as a witness. It is still harder that, when he is 
quoted, he should be quoted inaccurately, or mistranslated, as on pp. 18, 
37, 38, and 140. The italicised words on p. 38 are a clean mistrans 
lation, which gives the author's italics a point he did not intend ; and 
De Retz's antithesis about La Rochefoucauld, il n'a jamais ete guerrier, 
quoiqrfil fut trh-soldat, becomes nonsense when rendered as on p. 140, 
' he never was fit for war, though an excellent soldier/ Devotes for 
divots on p. 289 is also unfortunate. His account of the Fronde is, 
on the whole, well adapted to his purpose, but it is not free from 
blunders. To call the Parliament of Paris *the French Parliament,' as 
he does several times, argues a considerable misconception in his own 
mind, and is bound to mislead many readers. This appears most clearly 
when he talks of that body 'dismissing' a minister of the Crown 
(p. 128)! Nobody would guess from reading this and some neighbouring 
passages that the Parliament of Paris was one of a number of Parlia 
ments throughout France, and that all were simply close corporations of 
lawyers doing the judicial work of the country. Their likeness to 
the English Parliament scarcely extends beyond the name. They 
represented nobody but themselves ; and it was an accident that made 
them, in the absence of a States-General, the only body to which the 
people could readily appeal. There are some errors of detail also. 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 14:25:22 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
