The First Duke and Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne by Kenelm Digby
Review by: W. G. Blaikie Murdoch
The Scottish Historical Review, Vol. 8, No. 30 (Jan., 1911), pp. 202-203
Published by: Edinburgh University Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25518306 .
Accessed: 21/06/2014 21:40
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
Edinburgh University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Scottish
Historical Review.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 91.229.229.210 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 21:40:47 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
202 Lambeau : Bercy 
the annals of France, are fully discussed, as also the Seigneurie, with 
the chateau and its treasures. The town of Bercy and its social, political, 
industrial, and ecclesiastical history naturally occupies the greater part of 
the book. It was formed into a commune in 1790, and then in 1859, 
with the other neighbouring communes, became incorporated with Paris. 
M. Lambeau's volume is thus full of information on the growth of 
municipal and communal institutions, the progress of industry in a suburban 
township, and the gradual establishment of ecclesiastical foundations. The 
great princes of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were intimately 
associated with the history of Bercy, and they import a hint of splendour 
and romance into the author's sober narrative. 
A point of modern interest lies in the frequent references in the 
sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth century records to the flooding of 
the Seine, which from time to time caused great distress and damage to the 
town and its occupants : the river sometimes rose to a height of 24 feet; 
and in 1658 the castle and park were submerged. 
A valuable section of the volume is the appendix, containing 
' Pieces 
Justificatives' from the National Archives, upon which much of M, 
Lambeau's history is founded. The illustrations are numerous and finely 
executed. ., T 
Mary Love. 
The first Duke and Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. By the 
author of A Life of Sir Kenelm Digby. Pp. xi, 287. With 
14 Illustrations. 8vo. London: Longmans, Green & Co. 1910. 
1 os. 6d. nett. 
The Duke and Duchess of Newcastle are among the most interesting 
figures in Caroline history. The friend of Hobbes, the patron cf Ben 
Jonson, Newcastle was also for a while tutor to Charles IL, while he 
played a stirring part in the great Civil War, and probably spent more on 
behalf of the royal cause than any other cavalier. It is true that nowadays 
his writings are but little known, but his book on horsemanship was highly 
esteemed in its own day; while his work as dramatist won this distinction, 
at least, that selections therefrom were included by Charles Lamb in his 
memorable anthology, Specimens of English dramatic Poets who lived about 
the Time of Shakespeare. A kindred reason gives interest to the Duchess, 
for, albeit some of her contemporaries regarded her as mad, and although 
Pepys speaks of her with singular scorn, her memory was dearly beloved 
of Elia, who mentions her with affectionate admiration in many of his 
essays and letters. 
Save for a few quotations from the Welbeck MSS., the biography now 
before us does not set forth any documents likely to be unknown to the 
average student of history; and, in the main, it is based on comparatively 
famiiiar authorities. But granting this limitation, the book really fulfils 
its purpose remarkably well; for it narrates Newcastle's career in such a 
fashion as to make the more important events stand out clearly, while it 
pays particular attention to such of these events as were misrepresented by 
the Duchess in her life of her husband, and frequently serves to fill up 
This content downloaded from 91.229.229.210 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 21:40:47 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
First Duke and Duchess of Newcastle 203 
gaps which were left by the noble authoress. For instance, the Duchess 
gives only a short paragraph to Newcastle's teaching of Charles II., and 
therein depicts him as in every way a perfect tutor; but the work at 
present in question deals with this subject at length, and, besides furnish 
ing many fascinating personal details, shows that in some respects 
Newcastle was positively Machiavellian in his training of the royal pupil. 
This admirable tone of fairness characterizes the entire volume. The 
anthor is no hero-worshipper, but aims throughout at veracity, and deals 
frankly alike with failings and with merits. Nor is this true only as 
regards what he says of the Newcastles themselves, for it marks also all 
that he writes of Charles I. and Henrietta Maria, while it distinguishes 
his handling of the political history of the period, in which particular he 
does not betray predilections for either royalists or puritans. 
W. G. Blaikie Murdoch. 
From the Restoration to the Death of William III. (1660 
1702). By Richard Lodge, M.A., LL.D. [The Political History 
of England. In 12 volumes. Edited by William Hunt, D.Litt., 
and Reginald L. Poole, M.A., LL.D. Vol. VIII.] Pp. xix, 517. 
Demy 8vo. London : Longmans, Green & Co. 1910. 7s. 6d. nett. 
The period covered by this volume has been partially dealt with by 
Lingard and fully by Ranke. It has also been treated by Hallam in 
his Constitutional History^ which takes constant account of ' 
politics.' 
Macaulay's History, as Professor Lodge notes, still dominates the public 
mind. 
Professor Lodge is of the school of Ranke rather than of Macaulay. 
His volume has none of the premeditated brilliance of the great 
Whig historian; it is free from that 'stamping emphasis' of which 
Lord Morley once complained. But the style fits the subject, being 
concise yet supple ; it is laudably free from needless rhetoric, being set 
rather in the ' scientific' key. The order of treatment of the subjects 
(which cannot always be chronological) could hardly be bettered. Foreign 
politics are brought into adequate relation to the main theme, while the 
position in Scotland and Ireland at the various crises is sketched lucidly 
and with liberal insight. 
It seems to us, however, that there is something rather grudging, if 
not indeed confusing, in the final estimate of William. He is rated 
as having no superior among his English predecessors, but is forbidden 
to take his place among the greatest, not because of inherent inferiority 
or any real sacrifice of English to Dutch interests, but simply because 
he was not an Englishman. This seems to us taking away with one 
hand what was being given with the other. As William's place in 
history is to be judged by his actual achievement (the comparative merit 
of which Professor Lodge does not dispute) can his mere Dutch descent 
and attachment form such discounting elements ? 
Altogether the volume is a most welcome contribution to the literature 
of the subject, and should find a place in the front rank of the studies 
This content downloaded from 91.229.229.210 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 21:40:47 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
