The Thoreau Society, Inc
JOHN EVELYN, SIR KENELM DIGBY, AND THOREAU'S VITAL SPIRITS
Author(s): Michael West
Source: The Thoreau Society Bulletin, No. 117 (FALL 1971), p. 8
Published by: The Thoreau Society, Inc
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/23399286 .
Accessed: 20/06/2014 19:32
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
The Thoreau Society, Inc is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Thoreau
Society Bulletin.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 194.29.185.109 on Fri, 20 Jun 2014 19:32:50 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
A CHRONOLOGICAL STUDY 
OF THE POETRY OF 
HENRY DAVID THOREAU 
Vvjraer jno. dî-4Uôi; 
Donovan Le Roy Welch, Ph.D. 
The University of Nebraska, 1966 
Adviser: Christos Ε. Pulos 
This study traces Thoreau's development as a poet. A chro 
nological approach· to his verse enables one to evaluate the 
poetry esthetically and to study the evolution of his themes, 
imagery, rhythms, forms, and poetic theory. His poetic theo 
ries are particularly valuable keys to his intentions, for they 
disclose to what degree he was able to incorporate them into 
his verses. A minor assumption is a significant factor in the 
analyses of some poems. £>ince rhythms, imagery, and forms 
are a revelation of thought and temperament, prosodie analyses 
illustrate in new ways some established ideas in Thoreauvian 
scholarshin. 
Thoreau's college poems reveal a sensitive young man ex 
ploring the zenith and nadir of his emotions in poetic forms 
and diction derived from the metaphysical poets and the nature 
poets of the eighteenth century. In 1837-1838, feeling in ex 
celsis, that rare blessing of madness, became the cornerstone 
of his poetry and his poetic theory. Transcendental definitions 
of such words as friendship characterized his poetry of 1839 
1840. By 1841-1842, Thoreau's growing powers of discrimina 
tion caused him to become a less spontaneous, more reflective 
poet. A loss of innocence forced him, directly or indirectly, to 
modify his poetic theory of impulse, demand a life of solitude, 
and prefer life over art. The next period, 1843-1844, was a 
period of expanding consciousness in which the Transcendental 
theories of creation and perception appeared in his verse. 
A gradual disenchantment with his muse of poetry occurred 
from 1845-1857. Few new ideas appeared in his verse, and 
although his poems frequently sank into prose, a new note of 
humility emerged. 
A study of Thoreau s rhythms reveals that he rarely devi 
ated from his practice of writing transcendental arguments in 
conventional meters. But by using stressed rather that met 
rical rhythms in his Orphic poems, he not only achieved his 
most notable accomplishment in poetic music; he also em 
ployed rhythms which were architectural outgrowths of .his 
own demands. His images were extended after the manner of 
the metaphysical poets or pyramided in the tradition of the 
Transcendental poets. Those poems in which he used both 
imagistic techniques are generally unsuccessful. For one who 
wrote .so persuasively about the doctrine of organic form, 
Thoreau rarely used this poetic principle in his own verses. 
Only in the Orphic poems and possibly one or two others did 
he fulfill his theory of organicism. 
A chronological study of Thoreau's verse reveals his poetry 
to be the chrysalid stage in his evolution as a writer, for his 
rebellion in poetry consisted primarily of infusing transcen 
dental themes into his verses. He described the poet as a seer, 
the temperament of the poet as divine passivity, the function of 
the poet as a namer, and the genesis of the poem as organic; 
but he did not realize those poetic principles, in his verses. 
His poems contain common sense and severe truth, but they 
lack a feature inherent in hie best prose--beauty. 
Microfilm $3>O0; Xerography $8.20. 178 pages. 
metaphors in walden. 
(Order No. 68-10,510) 
Howard Rogers Houston, Ph.D. 
Clare mont Graduate School and 
University Center, 1967 
Supervisor: Edwin S. Fusseil 
Neither the form of Waiden--its firm structure and fine 
texture--nor its full meaning can be understood without giving 
attention to its metaphors in all their variations and permuta 
tions. The pattern of withdrawal and return, and of natural 
cycles--the year and the day--structure the total narrative, as 
well as certain individual chapters, and support the encompass 
ing theme of periodic rebirth. Other aspects of Thoreau's 
argument are similarly developed through metaphoric patterns. In criticizing society, Thoreau adapts such satiric conven 
tions as vignettes, catalogs of objects, and insect and animal 
metaphors to the American scene. "Desperation" discusses 
metaphors of entrapment, bondage, blindness, suffocation, dis 
ease, sleep, and death, which characterize the plight of the 
individual;· and metaphors of false and flimsy surfaces, ac 
cumulated trash, ruts and quagmires, obscuring clouds and 
smoke, machinery, and warfare, which characterize social 
life. Counterpointed against these are metaphors of natural 
rhythms and growth--especially of plants--which stand for 
freedom, health, and self-culture. The dominant structural 
metaphors in Waiden are horizontals and verticals--the hori 
zontal plane representing everything superficial, monotonous, 
repetitious, and futile, and the vertical axis representing pene 
tration, growth, and developing awarepess. 
"Living Deliberately" and "Morning Work" treat the symbolic 
aspects of Thoreau's experiment in living--his house-building 
and housekeeping, diet, gardening, and reading--and the rich 
crop of "tropes and expression" which these endeavors yield. 
He invests all his activities with sacramental meaning and 
transforms his cabin and its environs into a sacred "center" 
and mid-point on the vertical axis, opposed to the profane 
horizontal world of Concord. Metaphors and allusions drawn 
from the past--primitive, classical, and Oriental--stress the 
archetypal quality of his experience. 
"Fronting Keaiity" aeais witn inoreau s concept υχ growin 
as a continuing quest and assimilation of experience, a two 
directional process, like the growth of plants. Metaphors of 
depth, burrowing, and laying "foundations" express the effort 
to penetrate both outer and inner worlds; metaphors of eleva 
tion suggest the flowering of "facts" into truth and the develop 
ment of intuition. Thoreau treats the senses as vehicles of 
outward, and as metaphors for inward, exploration. One phase 
of Thoreau's quest culminates in "The Center," which explores 
Waiden Pond as a manifold symbol uniting the self, nature, and 
God. Metaphors of depth and height, reflections, inversions, 
and interaction between physical zones establish this complex 
identification. 
Thoreau's view of nature, "Cosmic Economy," combines 
vertical and cyclical metaphors. He derives them in part from 
the traditional idea of the "great chain," with its corollaries of 
plenitude, continuity, and correspondence, temporalized, in the 
Romantic mode, to accommodate notions of evolution and con 
tinual transcendence. Even "inanimate" nature thus becomes 
instinct with life and at least the potentiality of thought and 
spirit--an expression of the divine will. Nature struggles for 
more perfect self-actualization through endless rebirth. Sym 
bolic images of thawing clay and reawakening spring conclude 
Thoreau's narrative and thematic cycle. "Return" treats his 
role as evangelist and prophet of a comparable rebirth for 
society. Microfilm $3.15; Xerography $11.05. 243 pages. 
"Let a man step to the music which he hears...." 
JOURNAL, July 19, 1851 
JOHN EVELYN, SIR KENELM DIGBY, AND THOREAU'S VITAL 
SPIRITS by Michael West 
In Waiden's chapter "The Bean-Field Thoreau cites 
Sir Kenelm Digby as believing that the earth, lying 
fallow, recruits itself by attracting "vital spirits" 
from the air. The source of this quotation eluded 
the vigilance of Walter Harding in The Variorum Wai 
den: but in a recent article, "Evelyn's Lay Fields, 
Digby's Vital Spirits, and Thoreau's Beans." TSB. 
IUI UVö7^, 6-7, Ted-Larry Pebworth demonstrated that 
while Thoreau might have derived this idea from 
Digby's Discourse Concerning the Vegetation of Plants 
(1661), he might also have encountered it at second 
hand in John Evelyn's Terra: A Philosophical Dis 
course of Earth (London, 1729). 
Indeed, Thoreau's MS Fact-Book, now in the Wid 
ener Collection at Harvard, furnishes virtually con 
clusive proof that Evelyn was Thoreau's source. En 
titled "Extracts, mostly upon Natural History," this 
notebook contains passages transcribed from Thoreau's 
reading during the early 1850's. Several pages are 
devoted to extracts seriatim from Evelyn's Terra. 
Among them, on p. 103 of the MS notebook, Thoreau, 
following Evelyn, p. 16, notes Digby's belief in 
vital spirits. Prom the same page in Evelyn Thoreau 
took the quotation that appears in Waiden just prior 
to his reference to vital spirits. There is thus no 
reason to suppose that Thoreau's acquaintance with 
Digby extended to the original. 
Wesleyan University 
Middletown, Conn. 064-57 
This content downloaded from 194.29.185.109 on Fri, 20 Jun 2014 19:32:50 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
