The Library.
Sir Kenelm Digby and the Ancient Relations between
the French Libraries and Great Britain.
[A Communication made to the 15th Annual Meeting of the Library
Association of the United Kingdom, 12th September, 1892, by
Leopold Dclislc, Administrator General of the National Libraryr
Paris. Translated by G. A. Barringer, Bibliothlque Nationale,
Paris.']
/~*ENTLEMEN,—It would be a most interesting task to
^-Jr investigate the indebtedness of the French bibliographical
collections to Great Britain and Ireland, at different periods,
during the Middle Ages and modern times. It is a subject on
which an entire volume might be written, for many of its parts-
are totally unknown and might lead to important developments.
For the earliest period of the history of our libraries, it
would be necessary to examine the monuments of Irish and
Anglo-Saxon art, which were collected by the great monasteries
and principal churches of the Continent,1 and then to determine
what influence the contemplation of these beautiful models
exercised, during the IXth century, on the artists employed in
decorating and illuminating the splendid manuscripts produced
in the states ruled over by Charlemagne and his successors.1
1 To avoid details, which would be oat of place here, I will merely refer to
the Gospels called Saint Willibrode'i (MS. lat. 9389, RN.), to the Gospels of
Holcundus (formerly at Saint Gatien of Tours, now MS. Ut, 1587, of the
new acquisitions of the B.N.), and to the MS. of Epinal, which contains-
tbe Latin-English Glossary of the VIIIth Century, phsto-lithographed at
London in 1883.
* In a memoir entitled: I.'Evangiliaire dt Saint Vast d Arras ct la calli-
grapkit fratut-saxontu du IXi. Sihlt, I have reviewed the most striking
examples of this kind of manuscripts: the Bible of Charles the Bald, formerly
in the possession of the Abbey of Saint Denis (lat 3), the Gospels preserved at
the Bibliotheque Natiooale (lit. 357), at Lyons, at Cambrai, at Leyden, at the
Hague, at Utrecht, and at Berlin ; the Evangiliairt of Saint Vast at Arras; the
PsoTter of the University of Leipzig ; the SacnwittUairts preserved at the
Bibliotheque Nationals (lat. 3290), at Rheims, at Cambrai, at Haarlem, at
Stockholm, at Saint Petersburg!), and at Vienna.
 at New York University on April 18, 2015http://library.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
a The Library.
A not less curious chapter might be devoted to the works
of the Anglo-Saxon calhgrapher, who, struck by the merit of
the Caroline writing, made use of it for the production during
the Xth and Xlth centuries, of some admirable volumes, many
of which were used in French churches, even before the Conquest
by William, such as the Benedictionary of Archbishop Robert,
preserved at Rouen since the Xlth Century, the work to all
appearance, of the monks of Newminster at Winchester—or
as the Sacramentary of Winchcombe, which the city of Orleans
received among the spoils of the Abbey of Fleury-sur-Loire,
or finally, the Benedictionary of the Abbey of Ramsey, which
was sent beyond sea, about A.D. IOIO, to Gauzlin, Archbishop
of Bourges (now MS. lat. 987, of the Bibliotheque Nationale).
But it is especially during the time of the Norman supremacy
that a great many facts would have to be noticed, dealing with
the religious and literary relations between England and
Normandy, such as the journeys of Norman monks and clerks
to England, and of English monks and clerks to France, as
attested by so many texts; and such as the exchanges of books,
of which many traces still exist in the libraries, which have
inherited the ancient collections of the cathedral of Rouen, and
the abbeys of Saint Ouen, of Jumieges, of Saint Wandrille,
of Fecamp, of Saint-Evroul, and of Mont-Saint-Michel. We
could determine, I doubt not, the share which fell to the
Norman ecclesiastics in the organisation of the various English
workshops, whence issued so many books destined for the
churches of the Continent, as we learn from a canon of Sainte-
Barbe en Auge, who speaks of an English branch of his
house, where were copied books intended for the churches of
Normandy: Quia auUm a pud Bcqutfort victualium copia crat, scriptora
ftiam ibi habebantw quorum Optra ad not in Normaniatn mittebantur.1
Many books are still to be found in our libraries, which were
thus imported from England into France. They belong to the
most varied branches of literature, both profane and sacred.
Many are master-pieces 9 and to cite only one example, I will
call your attention, in passing, to the Great Bible of the
Bibliotheque Sainte Genevieve, that has come to us from
Canterbury.
The series of English Psalters, which from the Xllth to the
XlVth centuries, were used in France for the devotions of
1 MS. fa the library of Swnte Geoeviive, E. L 17, in 40, foL 61.
 at New York University on April 18, 2015http://library.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
Sir Ketulm Digby. 3
her kings and queens, her princes and princesses, her lords
and ladies, would, in itself, furnish the matter of a long chapter,
which might be illustrated by the reproduction of the most
varied miniatures, often of the most exquisite taste. What
would there not be to tell of the Psalters, indisputably of
English origin, in which a French translation accompanies the
Latin text ? One such bears at the Bibliotheque Nationale,
the No. 768 of the Latin Collection ; and came to us
from a French Church. In this, in order to conceal the country
whence the volume originated, the names of the Anglo-
Saxon saints have been erased in the calendar. Another,
in the same library (MSS. lat., 8846) is the giant Psalter, in
three volumes, with illuminations taken from the famous Psalter
of Utrecht, of which several pages (fol. 103 vo., 109 vo., 135, and
154 vo.) contain interlined passages of the Anglo-Saxon transla-
tion. Other examples, to confine ourselves to Royal copies, are the
Psalter of the University of Leyden (Suppl. No. 318), wherein
Saint Louis, it is said, learnt to read,1 and which was kept as a
relic in the XHIth and XlVth centuries by several princesses
of the House of France (it had been written, if not for Geoffrey
Plantagenet, Archbishop of York, at all events for a friend of
that prelate); a Psalter of the Sainte Chapelle (now No. 1186 of
the Bibliotheque de l'Arsenal) which has been, without very con-
clusive reason, attributed to either Saint Louis, or his mother,
Queen Blanche of Castille; and a Psalter belonging to the
Bibliotheque Sainte Genevieve (BB. 1. 33), which seems to
have been the property of Marguerite of Burgundy, queen of
Charles I., King of Naples.
The misfortunes of the XlVth and XVth centuries did not
interrupt the literary commerce between France and England.
Our princes obtained, in spite of all, a number of English books,
».#., of Latin or French books executed by English scribes or sold'
by London booksellers. King John, in order to edify and amuse
himself during the long hours of his captivity, bought from
English merchants, books, such as the Lt Roman du Reynard,
Garin It Loherain, the Toumoiemtnt £Antichrist,/and the Psalter.1
In the same way two of his grandsons, Charles, Duke of
Orleans, so famous for his poems; and John the Good, Count
of Angouleme, obtained, during their long captivity, books of
1 la this MSS., fol. 30, vo. and 18 , is found a note thus: " Cut puutlitrs
fu Monstigntur Saint Looys, quifu royi <U Franct, auquil il afriii tn s'enfanct,"
1 C*mfUr <U tArgtnttrit, edited by Doaet D'Aicq, p. 224, 227 and 281.
 at New York University on April 18, 2015http://library.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
