© Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2020 | doi:10.1163/15685349-12341384
Vivarium 58 (2020) 191-218
brill.com/viv
viva
riu m
Kenelm Digby on Quantity as Divisibility
Martine Pécharman
Centre de Recherches sur les Arts et le Langage (cral),  
École des hautes études en sciences sociales (ehess) & Centre national  
de la recherche scientifique (cnrs), Paris, France
martine.pecharman@ehess.fr
Abstract
Kenelm Digby’s Two Treatises, of the Nature of Bodies and of the Nature of Mans Soule 
(1644) defends quite an idiosyncratic approach to mind-body dualism. In his use of the 
divisibility argument to prove that the human soul cannot be a material substance, 
Digby takes an uncompromising stand for merely potential material parts. In his 
Treatise of Bodies the present article focuses on the mode of construction of the defini-
tion of quantity as divisibility and on its links to two distinct fundamental arguments 
against the actual material parts doctrine. The first, positive, argument consists of a 
semantic reason drawn from Digby’s general doctrine of meaning, whereas the second, 
negative, argument, addresses the traditional question of the composition of the con-
tinuum. The latter, the author contends, does not build on the medieval controversy 
itself, but on Digby’s opposition to Galileo’s claim of indivisibilism in his Dialogues 
Concerning Two Sciences (1638).
Keywords 
body – continuum – Digby – divisibility – part – quantity – whole
1 Introduction: An Outsider Defense of Mind-Body Dualism
In seventeenth-century projects in natural philosophy, both mechanism and 
the struggle against strictly mechanistic principles can be found to be associ-
ated with the metaphysical thesis that minds are different from bodies. For René 
Descartes (1596-1650) pre-eminently, an uncompromising pro-mechanical hy-
pothesis in the explanation of material substances and their properties was 
Downloaded from Brill.com11/15/2020 05:49:56AM
via University of Exeter

192 Pécharman
Vivarium 58 (2020) 191-218
the correlate of the metaphysical principle of substance dualism as the only 
permissible distinction between the material and the mental. Now, the way 
Descartes drew this distinction was very special. The Sixth Meditation (1641) 
deduced the real distinction of mind from body from my clear and distinct 
conceiving of thinking as my essential property and of extension as the essen-
tial property of body. In this approach, the cornerstone of mind-body dualism 
did not consist in a thesis concerning the material substance’s composite na-
ture.1 Later, in the Principia philosophiae (1644), when defining real distinction 
as a distinction between substances, Descartes asserted that every part of a 
corporeal substance is really distinct from its other parts.2 Yet the division of 
any body (and the subdivision of any portion of that body) into substances 
distinct from one another was not on the front line of the demonstration that 
the mind is not something corporeal. The Principia did not place emphasis 
on the ‘divisibility argument’. Instead, the criterion for demonstrating the im-
materiality of the mind was our referring all mental properties to a principal 
attribute, thought, which we clearly and distinctly conceive by distinguishing 
it from the principal attribute, extension, to which we refer all corporeal prop-
erties.3 Descartes’s preferred option was the ‘conceivability argument’. A ver-
sion of the divisibilibity argument was present, though, in the Meditations. In 
the Sixth Meditation, indeed, Descartes insisted on the contrast between my 
understanding of a thinking thing as something not compound and that of an 
extended thing as something divisible into parts. But his conclusion was that 
this argument would be by itself sufficient to demonstrate the complete differ-
ence of mind from body only if it were not already established from another 
source.4 Divisibility could merely constitute in the Cartesian model a second-
rank argument for asserting the real distinction of mind from body.
1   Descartes, Meditationes de prima philosophia v (Oeuvres de Descartes, ed. C. Adam and P. 
Tannery [= AT], revised edition, 11 vols., Paris, 1964-74, vol. vii, 78); The Philosophical Writings 
of Descartes, trans. J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff, and D. Murdoch (Cambridge, 1984-91), vol. 
2, 54. For a reconstruction of Descartes’s ‘Real Distinction Argument’: Marleen Rozemond, 
Descartes’s Dualism (Cambridge, MA, 1998), 1-37.
2   See Descartes, Principia Philosophiae i, §60 (AT viiiA, 28); Philosophical Writings, vol. 1, 224. 
As to the problematic status of Descartes’s declaration on parts of matter as separate sub -
stances: D. Garber, Descartes’ Metaphysical Physics (Chicago, 1992), 175-176.
3   See Descartes, Principia Philosophiae i, §53 (AT viiiA, 25); Philosophical Writings, vol. 1, 210 
(cf. i, §8, 7; trans., 195).
4   See Descartes, Meditationes de prima philosophia vi (AT vii, 85-86); Philosophical Writings, 
vol. 2, 59 [translation by ‘even if’ for the beginning of the phrase ‘si nondum illud aliunde satis 
scirem’ should be corrected]. The Synopsis of the Sixth Meditation presents the divisibility 
argument as a ‘confirmation’ of the conceivability argument (13; trans. 9).
Downloaded from Brill.com11/15/2020 05:49:56AM
via University of Exeter

193Kenelm Digby on Quantity as Divisibility
Vivarium 58 (2020) 191-218
The scenario for this distinction was quite different in the book The True 
Intellectual System of the Universe (1678), published by the Cambridge Platonist 
Ralph Cudworth (1617-1688) to defend corpuscular physics against all atheistic 
implications of mechanism. Cudworth attempted to promote a version of nat-
ural philosophy accounting for “mental causality” in the world.5 His engage -
ment with Descartes’s anti-finalism consisted in the hypothesis of a spiritual 
agency of nature operating on passive matter according to God’s design – he 
called “Plastick Nature” this incorporeal “Subordinate Instrument” of the divine 
ends.6 It was essential for Cudworth’s hypothesis to devise a new metaphysical 
dualism in response to Descartes’s restriction of thought to conscious thought. 
The basic ontological divide had to be between matter and an energy – life, or 
cogitation in an enlarged non-Cartesian sense – either unconscious (the Plastic 
Nature) or conscious (the mind).7 Unlike Descartes, moreover, Cudworth held 
that the infinite divisibility of body was the most prominent argument for the 
metaphysical scheme of substance dualism. Invoking the authority of Plotinus 
in the Fourth Ennead, in the Seventh Tractate On the Immortality of the Soul, 
Cudworth emphasized the contradiction between the extended substance, a 
mere multiplicity of substances, and the monadic nature of the substance re -
quired as the subject of perception.8 Plotinus, he stressed, advanced against 
the materiality of the soul the argument that no perception could be unified 
if its subject had the kind of unity of a body, namely, the unity only of a mul-
tiplicity of parts taken together. What is many cannot bring about what is one. 
Now, the unity of perception constitutes an uncontroversial datum of our con-
sciousness. Therefore, the soul cannot be something extended. Cudworth ad-
opted as the strongest argument for substance dualism the Neoplatonic version 
of the divisibility argument, claiming that whereas a body is composed of many 
substances (its spatially distinct parts), the soul needs to be a simple substance.9
5   Ralph Cudworth, The True Intellectual System of the Universe iii, c. 37, ‘A Digression con-
cerning the Plastick Life of Nature’ (London, 1678), 146-174 (§7, 154-155). See B. Lotti, Ralph 
Cudworth e l’idea di natura plastica (Udine, 2004).
6   Cudworth, The True Intellectual System of the Universe ii, c. 37, §5, 150.
7   See Cudworth, The True Intellectual System of the Universe ii, c. 37, §16, 159.
8   See Cudworth, The True Intellectual System of the Universe v, 824-826 (Cudworth quotes and 
translates or summarizes Enneads iv , 7.[2] 6-7). Cf. ibidem, 830: “a Monade, or one Single 
Substance, and not a Heap of Substances.” 
9   For the history of this ‘simplicity argument’ (named by Kant in his exposition of the Second 
Paralogism ‘the Achilles of all dialectical inferences in the pure doctrine of the soul’), see 
B.L. Mijuskovic, The Achilles of Rationalist Arguments. The Simplicity, Unity, and Identity of  
the Soul from the Cambridge Platonists to Kant: A Study in the History of an Argument (The 
Hague, 1974); T.M. Lennon and R.J. Stainton, eds., The Achilles of Rationalist Psychology 
(Dordrecht, 2008).
Downloaded from Brill.com11/15/2020 05:49:56AM
via University of Exeter

