International Archives of the History of Ideas
Archives internationales d'histoire des idées
239
Laura/uni00A0Georgescu
Han/uni00A0Thomas/uni00A0Adriaenssen/uni00A0/uni00A0/uni00A0Editors
The/uni00A0Philosophy 
of/uni00A0Kenelm 
Digby (1603–
1665)
International Archives of the History of Ideas 
Archives internationales d'histoire des idées
V olume 239
Editor-in-Chief
Guido Giglioni, University of Macerata, Civitanova Marche, Italy
Associate Editor
John Christian Laursen, University of California
Riverside, CA, USA
Editorial Board Members
Sarah Hutton, Dept of Philosophy, University of York, YORK, UK
Koen Vermeir, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France
José R. Maia Neto, University of Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Michael J. B. Allen, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA
Jean-Robert Armogathe, École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris, France
Stephen Clucas, Birkbeck, University of London, London, UK
Peter Harrison, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
John Henry, Science Studies Unit, University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
Martin Mulsow, Universität Erfurt, Gotha, Germany
Gianni Paganini, University of Eastern Piedmont, Vercelli, Italy
Jeremy Popkin, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY , USA
John Robertson, Clare College, Cambridge, UK
G. A. J. Rogers, Keele University, Keele, UK
Javier Fernández Sebastian, Universidad del País Vasco, Bilbao,  
Vizcaya, Spain
Ann Thomson, European University Institute (EUI), Florence, Italy
Theo Verbeek, Universiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
International Archives of the History of Ideas/Archives internationales d'histoire 
des idées is a series which publishes scholarly works on the history of ideas in the 
widest sense of the word. It covers history of philosophy, science, political and 
religious thought and other areas in the domain of intellectual history. The 
chronological scope of the series extends from the Renaissance to the Post-
 
Enlightenment. Founded in 1963 by R.H. Popkin and P
aul Dibon, the International 
Archives of the History of Ideas/Archives internationales d’histoire des idées 
publishes, edits and translates sources that have been either unknown hitherto, or 
unavailable, and publishes new research in intellectual history, and new approaches 
within the field. The range of recent volumes in the series includes studies on 
skepticism, astrobiology in the early modern period, as well as translations and 
editions of original texts, such as the Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick 
Diseases (1730) by Bernard Mandeville.
All books to be published in this Series will be fully peer-reviewed before final 
acceptance.
