Sir Kenelm Digby’s Interruptions: Piracy and Lived Romance 
in the 1620s 
Joe Moshenska
Studies in Philology, Volume 113, Number 2, Spring 2016, pp. 424-483 (Article)
Published by The University of North Carolina Press
For additional information about this article
Access provided by Cal State Univ @ Fresno (26 Oct 2017 04:25 GMT)
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/614016

© 2016 Studies in Philology, Incorporated
424
Sir Kenelm Digby’s Interruptions: 
Piracy and Lived Romance  
in the 1620s
by Joe Moshenska
Sir Kenelm Digby (1603–65) spent the year 1628 as a privateer in the Mediterranean. 
During his time at sea he not only performed notable feats of heroism but wrote an auto-
biographical romance titled Loose Fantasies on the island of Milos. This essay offers a 
new account of the historical significance of Digby’s voyage and of the literary activities 
woven through it. His decision to sail to the Mediterranean is placed within the context 
both of his individual biography and of the upsurge of nostalgia for Elizabethan naval 
prowess in the 1620s. Digby’s choice to name his alter ego in Loose Fantasies Theage-
nes, after the hero of Heliodorus’s Aethiopica, suggests his indebtedness to a specific 
romance tradition: Heliodoran romances hinged upon the nature of interruption, which 
could both drive and endanger their dilatory narratives, and Digby adopted and trans-
formed the term, construing interruption only as a threat to be averted. This was one of 
several textual strategies that he employed in order to ensure the success of his voyage 
and especially to nullify the charges of piracy repeatedly leveled against him. In doing 
so he did not simply write a romance based on his own life but strove to live his life as 
a romance.
O
N the 16th of August 1628, a small convoy of English ships ar-
rived on the Aegean island of Milos. It was a little over two 
months since its captain, the twenty-
 fiv
e-
 y
ear- ol
d Sir Kenelm 
Digby (1603–65), had led his fleet in an aggressive operation against 
a group of French merchant ships docked at the Turkish port of Scan-
deroon and the formidable Venetian galleasses that had tried to pro -
tect them. Digby had prevailed and added several French vessels to his 
command, which was already swollen considerably with prizes that he 
had taken since leaving England at the start of the year. His voyage had 
 J oe Moshenska  425
also t
aken him to Algiers, where he had negotiated the release of sev-
eral dozen English slaves, and to various Greek islands, where he had 
annoyed local dignitaries and pillaged works of classical statuary.1 Dis-
embarking from his flagship, the Eagle, Digby told his crew that he had 
“some serious business” demanding his attention and retired into the 
house of “a person of quality of that place.” There he sat down and began 
to write an autobiographical prose romance, in which he transposed his 
experiences, from his childhood until the Mediterranean voyage which 
he was then undertaking, into many of the tropes and conventions as -
sociated with the genre. Digby himself became “Theagenes”; his wife 
Venetia was re-
 b
aptized “Stelliana”; England became “Morea,” London 
“Corinth,” and so on. His voyage was reimagined as a venturing into the 
world to gain experience and renown in the manner of a knight errant.2
Digby was not the only English person to traverse the Mediterranean 
in this period, nor was he the only person who thought to rewrite parts 
of his life story as a thinly veiled romance.3 What makes his activity on 
Milos highly unusual is the simultaneity of the two activities: no other 
figure from this period presents us with such a closely interwoven 
1 
The fullest summary of the voyage, though hardly comprehensive, is given by Ken -
neth R. Andrews
, Ships, Money and Politics: Seafaring and Naval Enterprise in the Reign of 
Charles I (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 106–27. Brief, varyingly reliable 
accounts have been provided by Digby’s biographers: see E. W. Bligh, Sir Kenelm Digby 
and His Venetia (London: S. Low, Marston & Co. Ltd, 1932), 136–46; R. T. Petersson, Sir 
Kenelm Digby: The Ornament of England (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1956), 
74–82; and Vittorio Gabrieli, Sir Kenelm Digby: Un Inglese Italianato Nell’eta Della Controri-
forma (Rome: Storia e Letteratura, 1957), 37–62. The voyage receives only the briefest men-
tion in the most reliable extant overview of Digby’s life: see Michael Foster, “Sir Kenelm 
Digby (1603–65) as Man of Religion and Thinker I: Intellectual Formation,” The Downside 
Review 106 (1988): 37.
2 A manuscript version of this work survives as British Library [henceforth BL], MS 
Harleian 6758. Unless stated otherwise all citations are from Kenelm Digby, Loose Fanta-
sies, ed. Vittorio Gabrieli (Rome: Storia e Letteratura, 1968).
3 A notable instance is Robert Boyle’s An Account of Philaretus During his Minority , 
which, like Digby’s text, is romance as thinly veiled autobiography partly focused on 
foreign travel. The parallel is intriguing given that the careers of both men traced an arc 
from youthful romance to the eventual pursuit of natural philosophy, and they knew one 
another well, with Digby giving Boyle numerous alchemical manuscripts (for details see 
Lawrence M. Principe, “Newly Discovered Boyle Documents in the Royal Society Ar-
chive: Alchemical Tracts and His Student Notebook,” Notes and Records of the Royal So -
ciety of London 49.1 [1995]: 58–59 and 65). The comparison is made in passing by Michael 
Hunter, Boyle: Between God and Science (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009), 50; 
but their romances could hardly be more different in style and content, since Boyle’s em-
phasis is on his piety and sense of providential protection not his worldly adventures. 
For further discussion of Boyle’s text, see Lawrence M. Principe, “Virtuous Romance and 
Romantic Virtuoso: The Shaping of Robert Boyle’s Literary Style,” Journal of the History of 
Ideas 56 (1995): 377–97; and forthcoming work by Claire Preston.
